
1. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Oct 15;143A(20):2452-9.

An innocuous duplication of 11.2 Mb at 13q21 is gene poor: sub-bands of gene
paucity and pervasive CNV characterize the chromosome anomalies.

Daniel A(1), Darmanian A, Peters G, Goodwin L, Hort JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, Western Sydney Genetics Program, The Children's
Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, Australia. artd@chw.edu.au

A boy with autistic spectrum disorder without dysmorphisms was found to have a
chromosome duplication of part of band 13q21. His mother and grandfather both of 
normal intellect had the same chromosomal duplication. Comparison was made with
the Chromosome anomaly database
www.som.soton.ac.uk/research/geneticsdiv/anomaly%20register which revealed
similar cases. Mapping on DNA microarray for the proband and mother showed the
duplication to be of length 11.2 Mb, encompassing the 13q21.1-13q21.32 region.
The duplicated region is profoundly gene poor, with a mean gene density of 0.45
genes/Mb. We estimate, that the mean gene density in the sub-bands of the
chromosome anomalies is 2.4-2.5 genes/Mb. In addition the percentages of the
sub-bands reported as copy number variants (CNV) was estimated from the Database 
of Chromosome Genomic Variants (http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/). It was found
that for some of these sub-bands, gene paucity was likely to be a major
contributor to their innocuous phenotypic effect, for example, the gene densities
were for: 1p31.2 (1.25 genes/Mb); 2p12 (1.7); 4p15.31 (1.3); 5p14.1 (0.22);
5p14.3 (0.8); 5q21.2 (0.6); 5q21.3 (1.2); 8p23.2 (0.25); 13q21.1 (0.9); 14q31.1
(1.4); 18q22.1 (1.4); 21q21.1 (1.2); and 21q21.2 (0.7). For other sub-bands the
percentage of the band in which CNV have been reported was found to be markedly
increased, for example, 8p23.2 (94.7% of the band is defined by reported CNV);
3p26.3 (81.6); 5p14.3 (59.3); 8p22 (48.8); 2p12 (44.0); 5q21.1 (43.6); 6q24.2
(41.4); 9p23 (38.8); 10q21.1 (36.5); 5q21.2 (35.4), and 11q14.3 (33.8). We argue 
that both gene paucity and pervasive CNV are major indicators of bands conforming
to the Chromosome Anomaly phenomenon.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17853472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Science. 2007 Apr 20;316(5823):445-9. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Strong association of de novo copy number mutations with autism.

Sebat J(1), Lakshmi B, Malhotra D, Troge J, Lese-Martin C, Walsh T, Yamrom B,
Yoon S, Krasnitz A, Kendall J, Leotta A, Pai D, Zhang R, Lee YH, Hicks J, Spence 
SJ, Lee AT, Puura K, Lehtimäki T, Ledbetter D, Gregersen PK, Bregman J, Sutcliffe
JS, Jobanputra V, Chung W, Warburton D, King MC, Skuse D, Geschwind DH, Gilliam
TC, Ye K, Wigler M.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA. sebat@cshl.edu

We tested the hypothesis that de novo copy number variation (CNV) is associated
with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). We performed comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) on the genomic DNA of patients and unaffected subjects to
detect copy number variants not present in their respective parents. Candidate
genomic regions were validated by higher-resolution CGH, paternity testing,
cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and microsatellite genotyping. 
Confirmed de novo CNVs were significantly associated with autism (P = 0.0005).
Such CNVs were identified in 12 out of 118 (10%) of patients with sporadic
autism, in 2 out of 77 (3%) of patients with an affected first-degree relative,
and in 2 out of 196 (1%) of controls. Most de novo CNVs were smaller than
microscopic resolution. Affected genomic regions were highly heterogeneous and
included mutations of single genes. These findings establish de novo germline
mutation as a more significant risk factor for ASD than previously recognized.

PMCID: PMC2993504
PMID: 17363630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Med Genet. 2009 Sep;46(9):626-34. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.062471. Epub 2008 Dec
3.

Genomic duplication resulting in increased copy number of genes encoding the
sister chromatid cohesion complex conveys clinical consequences distinct from
Cornelia de Lange.

Yan J, Zhang F, Brundage E, Scheuerle A, Lanpher B, Erickson RP, Powis Z,
Robinson HB, Trapane PL, Stachiw-Hietpas D, Keppler-Noreuil KM, Lalani SR, Sahoo 
T, Chinault AC, Patel A, Cheung SW, Lupski JR.

BACKGROUND: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a multisystem congenital anomaly
disorder. Heterozygous point mutations in three genes (NIPBL, SMC3 and SMC1A),
encoding components of the sister chromatid cohesion apparatus, are responsible
for approximately 50-60% of CdLS cases. Recent studies have revealed a high
degree of genomic rearrangements (for example, deletions and duplications) in the
human genome, which result in gene copy number variations (CNVs). CNVs have been 
associated with a wide range of both Mendelian and complex traits including
disease phenotypes such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher,
Parkinson, Alzheimer, autism and schizophrenia. Increased versus decreased copy
number of the same gene can potentially cause either similar or different
clinical features.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study identified duplications on chromosomes 5 or X
using genome wide array comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH). The duplicated 
regions contain either the NIPBL or the SMC1A genes. Junction sequences analyses 
revealed the involvement of three genomic rearrangement mechanisms. The patients 
share some common features including mental retardation, developmental delay,
sleep abnormalities, and craniofacial and limb defects. The systems affected are 
the same as in CdLS, but clinical manifestations are distinct from CdLS;
particularly the absence of the CdLS facial gestalt.
CONCLUSIONS: The results confirm the notion that duplication CNV of genes can be 
a common mechanism for human genetic diseases. Defining the clinical consequences
for a specific gene dosage alteration represents a new "reverse genomics" trend
in medical genetics that is reciprocal to the traditional approach of delineation
of the common clinical phenotype preceding the discovery of the genetic
aetiology.

PMCID: PMC4302738
PMID: 19052029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 May;17(5):687-92. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.228. Epub 2008 Dec
3.

A 15q13.3 microdeletion segregating with autism.

Pagnamenta AT(1), Wing K, Sadighi Akha E, Knight SJ, Bölte S, Schmötzer G,
Duketis E, Poustka F, Klauck SM, Poustka A, Ragoussis J, Bailey AJ, Monaco AP;
International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK.

Autism and mental retardation (MR) show high rates of comorbidity and potentially
share genetic risk factors. In this study, a rare approximately 2 Mb
microdeletion involving chromosome band 15q13.3 was detected in a multiplex
autism family. This genomic loss lies between distal break points of the
Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome locus and was first described in association with 
MR and epilepsy. Together with recent studies that have also implicated this
genomic imbalance in schizophrenia, our data indicate that this CNV shows
considerable phenotypic variability. Further studies should aim to characterise
the precise phenotypic range of this CNV and may lead to the discovery of genetic
or environmental modifiers.

PMCID: PMC2986268
PMID: 19050728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 29;3(8):e3104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003104.

Small deletion variants have stable breakpoints commonly associated with alu
elements.

de Smith AJ(1), Walters RG, Coin LJ, Steinfeld I, Yakhini Z, Sladek R, Froguel P,
Blakemore AI.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Genomic Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, United Kingdom.

Copy number variants (CNVs) contribute significantly to human genomic variation, 
with over 5000 loci reported, covering more than 18% of the euchromatic human
genome. Little is known, however, about the origin and stability of variants of
different size and complexity. We investigated the breakpoints of 20 small,
common deletions, representing a subset of those originally identified by array
CGH, using Agilent microarrays, in 50 healthy French Caucasian subjects. By
sequencing PCR products amplified using primers designed to span the deleted
regions, we determined the exact size and genomic position of the deletions in
all affected samples. For each deletion studied, all individuals carrying the
deletion share identical upstream and downstream breakpoints at the sequence
level, suggesting that the deletion event occurred just once and later became
common in the population. This is supported by linkage disequilibrium (LD)
analysis, which has revealed that most of the deletions studied are in moderate
to strong LD with surrounding SNPs, and have conserved long-range haplotypes.
Analysis of the sequences flanking the deletion breakpoints revealed an
enrichment of microhomology at the breakpoint junctions. More significantly, we
found an enrichment of Alu repeat elements, the overwhelming majority of which
intersected deletion breakpoints at their poly-A tails. We found no enrichment of
LINE elements or segmental duplications, in contrast to other reports. Sequence
analysis revealed enrichment of a conserved motif in the sequences surrounding
the deletion breakpoints, although whether this motif has any mechanistic role in
the formation of some deletions has yet to be determined. Considered together
with existing information on more complex inherited variant regions, and reports 
of de novo variants associated with autism, these data support the presence of
different subgroups of CNV in the genome which may have originated through
different mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2518860
PMID: 18769679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nature. 2008 Sep 11;455(7210):232-6. doi: 10.1038/nature07229.

Large recurrent microdeletions associated with schizophrenia.

Stefansson H(1), Rujescu D, Cichon S, Pietiläinen OP, Ingason A, Steinberg S,
Fossdal R, Sigurdsson E, Sigmundsson T, Buizer-Voskamp JE, Hansen T, Jakobsen KD,
Muglia P, Francks C, Matthews PM, Gylfason A, Halldorsson BV, Gudbjartsson D,
Thorgeirsson TE, Sigurdsson A, Jonasdottir A, Jonasdottir A, Bjornsson A,
Mattiasdottir S, Blondal T, Haraldsson M, Magnusdottir BB, Giegling I, Möller HJ,
Hartmann A, Shianna KV, Ge D, Need AC, Crombie C, Fraser G, Walker N, Lonnqvist
J, Suvisaari J, Tuulio-Henriksson A, Paunio T, Toulopoulou T, Bramon E, Di Forti 
M, Murray R, Ruggeri M, Vassos E, Tosato S, Walshe M, Li T, Vasilescu C,
Mühleisen TW, Wang AG, Ullum H, Djurovic S, Melle I, Olesen J, Kiemeney LA,
Franke B; GROUP, Sabatti C, Freimer NB, Gulcher JR, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A,
Andreassen OA, Ophoff RA, Georgi A, Rietschel M, Werge T, Petursson H, Goldstein 
DB, Nöthen MM, Peltonen L, Collier DA, St Clair D, Stefansson K.

Collaborators: Kahn RS, Linszen DH, van Os J, Wiersma D, Bruggeman R, Cahn W, de 
Haan L, Krabbendam L, Myin-Germeys I.

Author information: 
(1)CNS Division, deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, IS-101 Reykjavík, Iceland.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2008 Sep;9(9):654.
    Nature. 2008 Sep 11;455(7210):178-9.

Reduced fecundity, associated with severe mental disorders, places negative
selection pressure on risk alleles and may explain, in part, why common variants 
have not been found that confer risk of disorders such as autism, schizophrenia
and mental retardation. Thus, rare variants may account for a larger fraction of 
the overall genetic risk than previously assumed. In contrast to rare single
nucleotide mutations, rare copy number variations (CNVs) can be detected using
genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism arrays. This has led to the
identification of CNVs associated with mental retardation and autism. In a
genome-wide search for CNVs associating with schizophrenia, we used a
population-based sample to identify de novo CNVs by analysing 9,878 transmissions
from parents to offspring. The 66 de novo CNVs identified were tested for
association in a sample of 1,433 schizophrenia cases and 33,250 controls. Three
deletions at 1q21.1, 15q11.2 and 15q13.3 showing nominal association with
schizophrenia in the first sample (phase I) were followed up in a second sample
of 3,285 cases and 7,951 controls (phase II). All three deletions significantly
associate with schizophrenia and related psychoses in the combined sample. The
identification of these rare, recurrent risk variants, having occurred
independently in multiple founders and being subject to negative selection, is
important in itself. CNV analysis may also point the way to the identification of
additional and more prevalent risk variants in genes and pathways involved in
schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC2687075
PMID: 18668039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Neuron. 2008 Apr 24;58(2):165-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.007.

Schizophrenia: genome, interrupted.

Cantor RM(1), Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Structural chromosomal variation is increasingly recognized as an important
contributor to human diseases, particularly those of neurodevelopment, such as
autism. A current paper makes a significant advance to schizophrenia genetics by 
establishing an association with rare copy number variants (CNV), which are
over-represented in neurodevelopmental genes.

PMID: 18439401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Jun 15;63(12):1111-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.01.009. 
Epub 2008 Mar 28.

Novel submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities detected in autism spectrum
disorder.

Christian SL(1), Brune CW, Sudi J, Kumar RA, Liu S, Karamohamed S, Badner JA,
Matsui S, Conroy J, McQuaid D, Gergel J, Hatchwell E, Gilliam TC, Gershon ES,
Nowak NJ, Dobyns WB, Cook EH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
schrist@bsd.uchicago.edu

BACKGROUND: One genetic mechanism known to be associated with autism spectrum
disorders (ASD) is chromosomal abnormalities. The identification of copy number
variants (CNV), i.e., microdeletions and microduplications that are undetectable 
at the level of traditional cytogenetic analysis, allows the potential
association of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances and human disease.
METHODS: We performed array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) utilizing a 
19K whole genome tiling path bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) microarray on 
397 unrelated subjects with autism spectrum disorder. Common CNV were excluded
using a control group comprised of 372 individuals from the National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) Genetics Initiative Control samples. Confirmation studies
were performed on all remaining CNV using fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), microsatellite analysis, and/or quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 51 CNV were confirmed in 46 ASD subjects. Three maternal
interstitial duplications of 15q11-q13 known to be associated with ASD were
identified. The other 48 CNV ranged in size from 189 kilobase (kb) to 5.5
megabase (Mb) and contained from 0 to approximately 40 National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Reference Sequence (RefSeq) genes. Seven CNV
were de novo and 44 were inherited.
CONCLUSIONS: Fifty-one autism-specific CNV were identified in 46 of 397 ASD
patients using a 19K BAC microarray for an overall rate of 11.6%. These
microdeletions and microduplications cause gene dosage imbalance in 272 genes,
many of which could be considered as candidate genes for autism.

PMCID: PMC2440346
PMID: 18374305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Med Genet. 2009 Mar;46(3):176-82. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.057505. Epub 2008 Mar
18.

Disruption of contactin 4 in three subjects with autism spectrum disorder.

Roohi J, Montagna C, Tegay DH, Palmer LE, DeVincent C, Pomeroy JC, Christian SL, 
Nowak N, Hatchwell E.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder of the
central nervous system of largely unknown aetiology. The prevalence of the
syndrome underscores the need for biological markers and a clearer understanding 
of pathogenesis. For these reasons, a genetic study of idiopathic ASD was
undertaken.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Array based comparative genomic hybridisation identified a
paternally inherited chromosome 3 copy number variation (CNV) in three
SUBJECTS: a deletion in two siblings and a duplication in a third, unrelated
individual. These variations were fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH)
validated and the end points further delineated using a custom fine tiling
oligonucleotide array. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products unique to the
rearrangements were amplified and sequence analysis revealed the variations to
have resulted from Alu Y mediated unequal recombinations interrupting contactin 4
(CNTN4).
CONCLUSION: CNTN4 plays an essential role in the formation, maintenance, and
plasticity of neuronal networks. Disruption of this gene is known to cause
developmental delay and mental retardation. This report suggests that mutations
affecting CNTN4 function may be relevant to ASD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2643049
PMID: 18349135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;82(2):477-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.12.009. Epub 2008
Jan 17.

Structural variation of chromosomes in autism spectrum disorder.

Marshall CR(1), Noor A, Vincent JB, Lionel AC, Feuk L, Skaug J, Shago M, Moessner
R, Pinto D, Ren Y, Thiruvahindrapduram B, Fiebig A, Schreiber S, Friedman J,
Ketelaars CE, Vos YJ, Ficicioglu C, Kirkpatrick S, Nicolson R, Sloman L, Summers 
A, Gibbons CA, Teebi A, Chitayat D, Weksberg R, Thompson A, Vardy C, Crosbie V,
Luscombe S, Baatjes R, Zwaigenbaum L, Roberts W, Fernandez B, Szatmari P, Scherer
SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of
Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, 
Canada.

Structural variation (copy number variation [CNV] including deletion and
duplication, translocation, inversion) of chromosomes has been identified in some
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but the full etiologic role is
unknown. We performed genome-wide assessment for structural abnormalities in 427 
unrelated ASD cases via single-nucleotide polymorphism microarrays and
karyotyping. With microarrays, we discovered 277 unbalanced CNVs in 44% of ASD
families not present in 500 controls (and re-examined in another 1152 controls). 
Karyotyping detected additional balanced changes. Although most variants were
inherited, we found a total of 27 cases with de novo alterations, and in three
(11%) of these individuals, two or more new variants were observed. De novo CNVs 
were found in approximately 7% and approximately 2% of idiopathic families having
one child, or two or more ASD siblings, respectively. We also detected 13 loci
with recurrent/overlapping CNV in unrelated cases, and at these sites, deletions 
and duplications affecting the same gene(s) in different individuals and
sometimes in asymptomatic carriers were also found. Notwithstanding complexities,
our results further implicate the SHANK3-NLGN4-NRXN1 postsynaptic density genes
and also identify novel loci at DPP6-DPP10-PCDH9 (synapse complex), ANKRD11,
DPYD, PTCHD1, 15q24, among others, for a role in ASD susceptibility. Our most
compelling result discovered CNV at 16p11.2 (p = 0.002) (with characteristics of 
a genomic disorder) at approximately 1% frequency. Some of the ASD regions were
also common to mental retardation loci. Structural variants were found in
sufficiently high frequency influencing ASD to suggest that cytogenetic and
microarray analyses be considered in routine clinical workup.

PMCID: PMC2426913
PMID: 18252227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;123(1-4):54-64. doi: 10.1159/000184692. Epub 2009 Mar 
11.

CNV and nervous system diseases--what's new?

Gu W(1), Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Several new genomic disorders caused by copy number variation (CNV) of genes
whose dosage is critical for the physiological function of the nervous system
have been recently identified. Dup(7)(q11.23) patients carry duplications of the 
genomic region deleted in Williams-Beuren syndrome, they are characterized by
prominent speech delay. The phenotypes of Potocki-Lupski syndrome and MECP2
duplication syndrome were neuropsychologically examined in detail, which revealed
autism as an endophenotype and a prominent behavioral feature of these disorders.
Tandem duplication of LMNB1 was reported to cause adult-onset autosomal dominant 
leukodystrophy. PAFAH1B1/LIS1 and YWHAE, which were deleted in isolated
lissencephaly (PAFAH1B1/LIS1 alone) and Miller-Dieker syndrome (both genes), were
found to be duplicated in patients with developmental delay. Finally, two novel
microdeletion syndromes affecting 17q21.31 and 15q13.3, as well as their
reciprocal duplications, were also identified. In this review, we provide an
overview of the phenotypic manifestation of these syndromes and the
rearrangements causing them.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2920183
PMID: 19287139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;123(1-4):36-43. doi: 10.1159/000184690. Epub 2009 Mar 
11.

The role of rare structural variants in the genetics of autism spectrum
disorders.

Kusenda M(1), Sebat J.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA.

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impaired social
interaction and communication and restricted interests and behaviors. Despite
high estimates of heritability, genetic causes of ASD have long been elusive, due
in part to a high degree of genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity (Bailey et al., 
1995). Recently, important advances have been made in the genetics of ASD with
the use of new technologies for the direct detection of copy number variation
(CNV) in the human genome. CNV studies have revealed that de novo deletions and
duplications, typically less than 1 Mb in size, are strongly associated with ASD,
suggesting that spontaneous structural mutations play a more important role in
the etiology of disease than was previously recognized. Rare mutations have been 
identified at many different locations in the genome, and multiple 'hot spots'
have been identified where identical rearrangements recur with high frequency.
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that autism, like mental
retardation, is caused by a large number of individually rare mutations. These
studies serve as a model for how other emerging technologies for mutation
detection (e.g. next generation sequencing platforms) could be used to further
elucidate the role of rare sequence changes in ASD.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2920182
PMID: 19287137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Trends Genet. 2009 Dec;25(12):536-44. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2009.10.006. Epub 2009
Nov 10.

Copy-number variants in neurodevelopmental disorders: promises and challenges.

Merikangas AK(1), Corvin AP, Gallagher L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, St. James
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. merikana@tcd.ie

Copy-number variation (CNV) is the most prevalent type of structural variation in
the human genome. There is emerging evidence that copy-number variants (CNVs)
provide a new vista on understanding susceptibility to neuropsychiatric
disorders. Some challenges in the interpretation of current CNV studies include
the use of overlapping samples, differing phenotypic definitions, an absence of
population norms for CNVs and a lack of consensus in methods for CNV detection
and analysis. Here, we review current CNV association study methods and results
in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia, and provide suggestions for
design approaches to future studies that might maximize the translation of this
work to etiological understanding.

PMID: 19910074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2010:371-82.

COKGEN: a software for the identification of rare copy number variation from SNP 
microarrays.

YavaÅ G(1), KoyutÃ¼rk M, OzsoyoÄlu M, Gould MP, Laframboise T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Until fairly recently, it was believed that essentially all human cells harbor
two copies of each locus in the autosomal genome. However, studies have now shown
that there are segments of the genome that are polymorphic with regard to genomic
copy number. These copy number variations (CNVs) have a role in various diseases 
such as Alzheimer disease, Crohn's disease, autism and schizophrenia. In the
effort to scan the entire genome for these gains and losses of DNA, single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have emerged as an important tool. As such, 
CNV identification from SNP array data is attracting considerable attention as an
algorithmic problem, and many methods have been published over the last few
years. However, many of the existing model-based methods train their models based
on common variations and are therefore less successful in the identification of
rare CNVs, detection of which may be very important in personalized genomics
applications. In this paper, we formulate CNV identification explicitly as an
optimization problem with an objective function that is characterized by several 
adjustable parameters. These parameters can be configured based on the
characteristics of the experimental platform and target application, so that the 
solution to the optimization problem is the most accurate set of CNV calls. Our
method, termed COKGEN, efficiently solves this problem using a variant of the
well-known heuristic simulated annealing. We apply COKGEN to data from hundreds
of samples, and demonstrate its ability to detect known CNVs at a high level of
sensitivity without sacrificing specificity, not only for common but also rare
CNVs. Furthermore, we show that it performs better than other publicly-available 
methods. The configurability of COKGEN, its computational efficiency, and its
accuracy in calling rare CNVs make it particularly useful for personalized
genomics applications. COKGEN is implemented as an R package and is freely
available at http://mendel.gene.cwru.edu/laframboiselab/software.php.

PMID: 19908389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2009 Nov;9(8):795-803. doi: 10.1586/erm.09.59.

Autism genetics: emerging data from genome-wide copy-number and single nucleotide
polymorphism scans.

Weiss LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Institute for Human Genetics, Center for
Neurobiology and Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory, Box F-0984, San Francisco, 
CA 94143-0984, USA. lauren.weiss@ucsf.edu

Autism and related traits are highly heritable but cannot be explained by
currently known genetic risk factors. Therefore, the advent of genome-wide single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number variant (CNV) microarray
technologies heralded identification of additional autism loci. CNVs associated
with autism seem to show variable expressivity, also leading to other phenotypes,
such as schizophrenia, mental retardation/developmental delay and epilepsy.
Initial genome-wide SNP-association studies have each identified a single novel
associated locus with modest effect. Based on the lessons from other complex
common disease, larger sample sizes and meta-analyses are likely to identify
additional SNP loci, and the genes implicated may act on multiple related
disorders. Even if common alleles or rare variants hold little predictive value, 
neurodevelopmental pathways disrupted in autism may be identified. Future
research might yet uncover common CNV risk loci and rare single nucleotide risk
alleles, which are currently difficult to detect. The genetic architecture and
phenotypic heterogeneity identified so far suggest additional approaches, such as
population-based research and study of relevant neurobiological endophenotypes.

PMID: 19895225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Med Genet. 2010 Mar;47(3):195-203. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.069369. Epub 2009 Sep 
15.

Phenotypic spectrum associated with de novo and inherited deletions and
duplications at 16p11.2 in individuals ascertained for diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder.

Fernandez BA(1), Roberts W, Chung B, Weksberg R, Meyn S, Szatmari P,
Joseph-George AM, Mackay S, Whitten K, Noble B, Vardy C, Crosbie V, Luscombe S,
Tucker E, Turner L, Marshall CR, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Provincial Medical Genetics Program, Health Sciences Center, 300 Prince Philip
Drive, St. John's Newfoundland, A1B 3V6, Canada. bfernandez@nl.rogers.com

BACKGROUND: Recurrent microdeletions and microduplications of approximately 555
kb at 16p11.2 confer susceptibility to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in up to 1%
of ASD patients. No physical or behavioural features have been identified that
distinguish these individuals as having a distinct ASD subtype, but clinical data
are limited.
METHODS: We report five autistic probands identified by microarray analysis with 
copy number variation (CNV) of 16p11.2 (three deletions, two duplications). Each 
patient was assessed for ASD and dysmorphic features. We also describe a deletion
positive 26-month-old female who has developmental delay (DD) and autistic
features.
RESULTS: Proband 1 (female with ASD, de novo deletion) is not dysmorphic. Proband
2 (male with autism, de novo deletion) and proband 3 and his brother (males with 
autism, inherited deletions) are dysmorphic, but the two probands do not resemble
one another. The mother of proband 3 has mild mental retardation (MR), minor
dysmorphism and meets the criteria for ASD. Proband 4 (dysmorphic autistic male, 
de novo duplication) had a congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Proband 5
(non-dysmorphic ASD female with a duplication) has two apparently healthy
duplication positive relatives. Probands 1 and 2 have deletion negative siblings 
with ASD and Asperger syndrome, respectively. Proband 6 (a female with DD and an 
inherited duplication) is dysmorphic, but has oligohydramnios sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotypic spectrum associated with CNV at 16p11.2 includes ASD,
MR/DD and/or possibly other primary psychiatric disorders. Compared with the
microduplications, the reciprocal microdeletions are more likely to be penetrant 
and to be associated with non-specific major or minor dysmorphism. There are
deletion positive ASD probands with a less severe phenotype than deletion
negative ASD siblings underscoring the significant phenotypic heterogeneity.

PMID: 19755429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009 Sep;66(9):947-56. doi:
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.80.

Recurrent rearrangements in synaptic and neurodevelopmental genes and shared
biologic pathways in schizophrenia, autism, and mental retardation.

Guilmatre A(1), Dubourg C, Mosca AL, Legallic S, Goldenberg A, Drouin-Garraud V, 
Layet V, Rosier A, Briault S, Bonnet-Brilhault F, Laumonnier F, Odent S, Le Vacon
G, Joly-Helas G, David V, Bendavid C, Pinoit JM, Henry C, Impallomeni C, Germano 
E, Tortorella G, Di Rosa G, Barthelemy C, Andres C, Faivre L, FrÃ©bourg T, Saugier
Veber P, Campion D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la SantÃ© et de la Recherche MÃ©dicale, UnitÃ© 614, Institut
Hospitalo-Universitaire de Recherche BiomÃ©dicale, 76000 Rouen, France.

CONTEXT: Results of comparative genomic hybridization studies have suggested that
rare copy number variations (CNVs) at numerous loci are involved in the cause of 
mental retardation, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia.
OBJECTIVES: To provide an estimate of the collective frequency of a set of
recurrent or overlapping CNVs in 3 different groups of cases compared with
healthy control subjects and to assess whether each CNV is present in more than 1
clinical category.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Academic research.
PARTICIPANTS: We investigated 28 candidate loci previously identified by
comparative genomic hybridization studies for gene dosage alteration in 247 cases
with mental retardation, in 260 cases with autism spectrum disorders, in 236
cases with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, and in 236 controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Collective and individual frequencies of the analyzed CNVs
in cases compared with controls.
RESULTS: Recurrent or overlapping CNVs were found in cases at 39.3% of the
selected loci. The collective frequency of CNVs at these loci is significantly
increased in cases with autism, in cases with schizophrenia, and in cases with
mental retardation compared with controls (P < .001, P = .01, and P = .001,
respectively, Fisher exact test). Individual significance (P = .02 without
correction for multiple testing) was reached for the association between autism
and a 350-kilobase deletion located at 22q11 and spanning the PRODH and DGCR6
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Weakly to moderately recurrent CNVs (transmitted or occurring de
novo) seem to be causative or contributory factors for these diseases. Most of
these CNVs (which contain genes involved in neurotransmission or in synapse
formation and maintenance) are present in the 3 pathologic conditions
(schizophrenia, autism, and mental retardation), supporting the existence of
shared biologic pathways in these neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC2958844
PMID: 19736351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Med Genet. 2009 Oct;46(10):680-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.066795. Epub 2009 Jul
21.

Phenomic determinants of genomic variation in autism spectrum disorders.

Qiao Y(1), Riendeau N, Koochek M, Liu X, Harvard C, Hildebrand MJ, Holden JJ,
Rajcan-Separovic E, Lewis ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, The University of British Columbia, and BC
Child and Family Research Institute, C234-4500 Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, V6H
3N1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are common, heritable neurobiologic 
conditions of unknown aetiology confounded by significant clinical and genetic
heterogeneity.
METHODS: This study evaluated a broad categorisation of phenotypic traits (or
phenome) for 100 subjects with Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised/Autism
Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Generic (ADI-R/ADOS-G) confirmed idiopathic ASD
undergoing 1 Mb bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array comparative genomic
hybridisation (CGH).
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Array CGH uncovered nine different pathogenic copy
number variants (pCNVs) in 9/100 ASD subjects having complex phenotypes (ASD+/-
intellectual disability (ID; IQ<70)) and/or physical anomalies), normal
karyotype, fragile X analysis, and comprehensive evaluation by a clinical
geneticist. Unique pCNVs in our cohort included del(5)(p15.2p15.31) (2.4 Mb),
del(3)(p24.3) (0.1 Mb) and dup(18)(p11.3)(0.9 Mb). Five pCNVs were recurrent in
our cohort or were previously described in subjects with ASD+/-ID:
(dup(7)(q11.23)(1.5 Mb); del(2)(p15p16.1) (6.1 Mb and 7.9 Mb); del(14)(q11.2)
(0.7 Mb) and dup(15)(q11q13) (10 Mb), including del(X)(p11.22) (470 Kb) in two
autistic brothers. Male: female distribution in subjects with pCNVs was reduced
to 1.25:1 from 3.2:1 in the original cohort. The authors stratified the study
population according to a broad spectrum of clinical features and correlated
specific phenotypes with respect to CNV load and pathogenicity. The findings
indicate increased prevalence of pCNVs in subjects with microcephaly (<2nd
centile; n = 2 of 4 ASD subjects with microcephaly; p = 0.04), and ID (n = 9 of
64 subjects with ASD and ID; p = 0.02). Interestingly, in the absence of ID
co-morbidity with an ASD, no pCNVs were found. The relationship between parental 
ages at delivery and CNV load and pathogenicity was also explored.

PMID: 19625284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Jun 30;10:61. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-61.

Association study of SHANK3 gene polymorphisms with autism in Chinese Han
population.

Qin J(1), Jia M, Wang L, Lu T, Ruan Y, Liu J, Guo Y, Zhang J, Yang X, Yue W,
Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mental Health, Peking University, Beijing, PR China.
jianqin@bjmu.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Autism, a heterogeneous disease, is described as a genetic psychiatry
disorder. Recently, abnormalities at the synapse are supposed to be important for
the etiology of autism.SHANK3 (SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains protein)
gene encodes a master synaptic scaffolding protein at postsynaptic density (PSD) 
of excitatory synapse. Rare mutations and copy number variation (CNV) evidence
suggested SHANK3 as a strong candidate gene for the pathogenesis of autism.
METHODS: We performed an association study between SHANK3 gene polymorphisms and 
autism in Chinese Han population. We analyzed the association between five single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the SHANK3 gene and autism in 305 Chinese Han 
trios, using the family based association test (FBAT). Linkage disequilibrium
(LD) analysis showed the presence of LD between pairwise markers across the
locus. We also performed mutation screening for the rare de novo mutations
reported previously.
RESULTS: No significant evidence between any SNPs of SHANK3 and autism was
observed. We did not detect any mutations described previously in our cohort.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that SHANK3 might not represent a major susceptibility
gene for autism in Chinese Han population.

PMCID: PMC2721832
PMID: 19566951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000531. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000531. Epub 2009 
Jun 26.

Forging links between human mental retardation-associated CNVs and mouse gene
knockout models.

Webber C(1), Hehir-Kwa JY, Nguyen DQ, de Vries BB, Veltman JA, Ponting CP.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Rare copy number variants (CNVs) are frequently associated with common
neurological disorders such as mental retardation (MR; learning disability),
autism, and schizophrenia. CNV screening in clinical practice is limited because 
pathological CNVs cannot be distinguished routinely from benign CNVs, and because
genes underlying patients' phenotypes remain largely unknown. Here, we present a 
novel, statistically robust approach that forges links between 148 MR-associated 
CNVs and phenotypes from approximately 5,000 mouse gene knockout experiments.
These CNVs were found to be significantly enriched in two classes of genes, those
whose mouse orthologues, when disrupted, result in either abnormal axon or
dopaminergic neuron morphologies. Additional enrichments highlighted
correspondences between relevant mouse phenotypes and secondary presentations
such as brain abnormality, cleft palate, and seizures. The strength of these
phenotype enrichments (>100% increases) greatly exceeded molecular annotations
(<30% increases) and allowed the identification of 78 genes that may contribute
to MR and associated phenotypes. This study is the first to demonstrate how the
power of mouse knockout data can be systematically exploited to better understand
genetically heterogeneous neurological disorders.

PMCID: PMC2694283
PMID: 19557186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;15(6):637-46. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.57. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Rare structural variants found in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder are
preferentially associated with neurodevelopmental genes.

Elia J(1), Gai X, Xie HM, Perin JC, Geiger E, Glessner JT, D'arcy M, deBerardinis
R, Frackelton E, Kim C, Lantieri F, Muganga BM, Wang L, Takeda T, Rappaport EF,
Grant SF, Berrettini W, Devoto M, Shaikh TH, Hakonarson H, White PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;15(11):1122.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common and highly heritable 
disorder, but specific genetic factors underlying risk remain elusive. To assess 
the role of structural variation in ADHD, we identified 222 inherited copy number
variations (CNVs) within 335 ADHD patients and their parents that were not
detected in 2026 unrelated healthy individuals. Although no excess CNVs, either
deletions or duplications, were found in the ADHD cohort relative to controls,
the inherited rare CNV-associated gene set was significantly enriched for genes
reported as candidates in studies of autism, schizophrenia and Tourette syndrome,
including A2BP1, AUTS2, CNTNAP2 and IMMP2L. The ADHD CNV gene set was also
significantly enriched for genes known to be important for psychological and
neurological functions, including learning, behavior, synaptic transmission and
central nervous system development. Four independent deletions were located
within the protein tyrosine phosphatase gene, PTPRD, recently implicated as a
candidate gene for restless legs syndrome, which frequently presents with ADHD. A
deletion within the glutamate receptor gene, GRM5, was found in an affected
parent and all three affected offspring whose ADHD phenotypes closely resembled
those of the GRM5 null mouse. Together, these results suggest that rare inherited
structural variations play an important role in ADHD development and indicate a
set of putative candidate genes for further study in the etiology of ADHD.

PMCID: PMC2877197
PMID: 19546859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genome Res. 2009 Sep;19(9):1579-85. doi: 10.1101/gr.094987.109. Epub 2009 Jun 8.

A method for rapid, targeted CNV genotyping identifies rare variants associated
with neurocognitive disease.

Mefford HC(1), Cooper GM, Zerr T, Smith JD, Baker C, Shafer N, Thorland EC,
Skinner C, Schwartz CE, Nickerson DA, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA.

Copy-number variants (CNVs) are substantial contributors to human disease. A
central challenge in CNV-disease association studies is to characterize the
pathogenicity of rare and possibly incompletely penetrant events, which requires 
the accurate detection of rare CNVs in large numbers of individuals. Cost and
throughput issues limit our ability to perform these studies. We have adapted the
Illumina BeadXpress SNP genotyping assay and developed an algorithm,
SNP-Conditional OUTlier detection (SCOUT), to rapidly and accurately detect both 
rare and common CNVs in large cohorts. This approach is customizable, cost
effective, highly parallelized, and largely automated. We applied this method to 
screen 69 loci in 1105 children with unexplained intellectual disability,
identifying pathogenic variants in 3.1% of these individuals and potentially
pathogenic variants in an additional 2.3%. We identified seven individuals (0.7%)
with a deletion of 16p11.2, which has been previously associated with autism. Our
results widen the phenotypic spectrum of these deletions to include intellectual 
disability without autism. We also detected 1.65-3.4 Mbp duplications at 16p13.11
in 1.1% of affected individuals and 350 kbp deletions at 15q11.2, near the
Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome critical region, in 0.8% of affected individuals. 
Compared to published CNVs in controls they are significantly (P = 4.7 x 10(-5)
and 0.003, respectively) enriched in these children, supporting previously
published hypotheses that they are neurocognitive disease risk factors. More
generally, this approach offers a previously unavailable balance between
customization, cost, and throughput for analysis of CNVs and should prove
valuable for targeted CNV detection in both research and diagnostic settings.

PMCID: PMC2752120
PMID: 19506092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Br Med Bull. 2009;91:61-74. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldp017. Epub 2009 May 14.

Schizophrenia genetics: new insights from new approaches.

Williams HJ(1), Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Schizophrenia is a debilitating psychiatric disorder that imposes a
considerable burden on sufferers, their families and society. The prominent
involvement of genes, combined with the complexity and relative inaccessibility
of the brain has led many to suggest that the identification of specific risk
loci offers the best chance of understanding pathogenesis.
SOURCES OF DATA: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and copy number
variation (CNV) publications have been included in this review along with key
papers from the fields of schizophrenia, functional psychoses and complex disease
mapping.
AREAS OF AGREEMENT: Recent GWAS have now shown that both common alleles of small 
effect and rare alleles of moderate to large effect contribute to the high
heritability of schizophrenia.
AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: It is well known that many schizophrenic patients suffer
symptoms seen in patients with bipolar disease and vice versa. There is now
considerable interest in using aetiologically relevant risk factors, including
genes, to explore the validity of the contemporary system of classification.
GROWING POINTS: Rare CNVs have been shown to play a role in at least some cases
of schizophrenia and it is highly predictable that this figure will rise with the
use of technologies with higher resolution or that are better designed to assay
common CNVs reliably.
AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING RESEARCH: The findings with common alleles thus far
point to overlap in the genetic risk for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder,
while the specific CNVs implicated in schizophrenia also increase susceptibility 
to a range of developmental disorders, including autism, mental retardation,
attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and epilepsy.

PMID: 19443537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Psychiatr Genet. 2009 Aug;19(4):177-85. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32832bdafa.

Copy number variations associated with idiopathic autism identified by
whole-genome microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization.

Cho SC(1), Yim SH, Yoo HK, Kim MY, Jung GY, Shin GW, Kim BN, Hwang JW, Kang JJ,
Kim TM, Chung YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul National University Hospital, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been thought to have strong
genetic background, but major contributing genes or associated molecular-genetic 
pathways are yet to be identified. To explore the idiopathic ASD-associated copy 
number variations (CNVs), we conducted case-control study using whole-genome copy
number analysis.
METHODS: Whole-genome microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization was
carried out on 28 children (24 boys and four girls) diagnosed as ASD and 62
Korean adults (45 males and 17 females) without any signs of abnormalities and
family history of genetic disorders as normal controls. Fluorescence in-situ
hybridization and capillary electrophoresis-single-strand conformational
polymorphism were used for quantitative verification of the ASD-associated CNVs.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight CNVs were identified. Among them, the distributions of copy
number loss CNVs on 8p23.1 (odds ratio: 5.1, 95% confidence interval: 1.7-14.5,
P=0.003) and on 17p11.2 (odds ratio: uncalculable because of zero cell, P=0.008) 
were found to be significantly different between ASD and control groups. DEFENSIN
family occurs in a cluster at 8p23.1 region. Fluorescence in-situ hybridization
and capillary electrophoresis-single-strand conformational polymorphism
coherently showed reduced copy number of DEFENSIN in cases with 8p23.1 copy
number loss CNV, which validated microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization results; but there are no known coding genes in the CNV on 17p11.2.
CONCLUSION: Our approach as well as results can help to elucidate the genetic
mechanism of idiopathic ASD.

PMID: 19407672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nature. 2009 May 28;459(7246):569-73. doi: 10.1038/nature07953. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

Autism genome-wide copy number variation reveals ubiquitin and neuronal genes.

Glessner JT(1), Wang K, Cai G, Korvatska O, Kim CE, Wood S, Zhang H, Estes A,
Brune CW, Bradfield JP, Imielinski M, Frackelton EC, Reichert J, Crawford EL,
Munson J, Sleiman PM, Chiavacci R, Annaiah K, Thomas K, Hou C, Glaberson W, Flory
J, Otieno F, Garris M, Soorya L, Klei L, Piven J, Meyer KJ, Anagnostou E, Sakurai
T, Game RM, Rudd DS, Zurawiecki D, McDougle CJ, Davis LK, Miller J, Posey DJ,
Michaels S, Kolevzon A, Silverman JM, Bernier R, Levy SE, Schultz RT, Dawson G,
Owley T, McMahon WM, Wassink TH, Sweeney JA, Nurnberger JI, Coon H, Sutcliffe JS,
Minshew NJ, Grant SF, Bucan M, Cook EH, Buxbaum JD, Devlin B, Schellenberg GD,
Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are childhood neurodevelopmental disorders with 
complex genetic origins. Previous studies focusing on candidate genes or genomic 
regions have identified several copy number variations (CNVs) that are associated
with an increased risk of ASDs. Here we present the results from a whole-genome
CNV study on a cohort of 859 ASD cases and 1,409 healthy children of European
ancestry who were genotyped with approximately 550,000 single nucleotide
polymorphism markers, in an attempt to comprehensively identify CNVs conferring
susceptibility to ASDs. Positive findings were evaluated in an independent cohort
of 1,336 ASD cases and 1,110 controls of European ancestry. Besides previously
reported ASD candidate genes, such as NRXN1 (ref. 10) and CNTN4 (refs 11, 12),
several new susceptibility genes encoding neuronal cell-adhesion molecules,
including NLGN1 and ASTN2, were enriched with CNVs in ASD cases compared to
controls (P = 9.5 x 10(-3)). Furthermore, CNVs within or surrounding genes
involved in the ubiquitin pathways, including UBE3A, PARK2, RFWD2 and FBXO40,
were affected by CNVs not observed in controls (P = 3.3 x 10(-3)). We also
identified duplications 55 kilobases upstream of complementary DNA AK123120 (P = 
3.6 x 10(-6)). Although these variants may be individually rare, they target
genes involved in neuronal cell-adhesion or ubiquitin degradation, indicating
that these two important gene networks expressed within the central nervous
system may contribute to the genetic susceptibility of ASD.

PMCID: PMC2925224
PMID: 19404257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Mar-Jun;52(2-3):77-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.03.006.
Epub 2009 Mar 21.

Extending the phenotype of recurrent rearrangements of 16p11.2: deletions in
mentally retarded patients without autism and in normal individuals.

Bijlsma EK(1), Gijsbers AC, Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH, van Haeringen A, Fransen van 
de Putte DE, Anderlid BM, Lundin J, Lapunzina P, PÃ©rez Jurado LA, Delle Chiaie B,
Loeys B, Menten B, Oostra A, Verhelst H, Amor DJ, Bruno DL, van Essen AJ, Hordijk
R, Sikkema-Raddatz B, Verbruggen KT, Jongmans MC, Pfundt R, Reeser HM, Breuning
MH, Ruivenkamp CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. e.k.bijlsma@lumc.nl

Array CGH (comparative genomic hybridization) screening of large patient cohorts 
with mental retardation and/or multiple congenital anomalies (MR/MCA) has led to 
the identification of a number of new microdeletion and microduplication
syndromes. Recently, a recurrent copy number variant (CNV) at chromosome 16p11.2 
was reported to occur in up to 1% of autistic patients in three large autism
studies. In the screening of 4284 patients with MR/MCA with various array
platforms, we detected 22 individuals (14 index patients and 8 family members)
with deletions in 16p11.2, which are genomically identical to those identified in
the autism studies. Though some patients shared a facial resemblance and a
tendency to overweight, there was no evidence for a recognizable phenotype.
Autism was not the presenting feature in our series. The assembled evidence
indicates that recurrent 16p11.2 deletions are associated with variable clinical 
outcome, most likely arising from haploinsufficiency of one or more genes. The
phenotypical spectrum ranges from MR and/or MCA, autism, learning and speech
problems, to a normal phenotype.

PMID: 19306953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Mar-Apr;2(2):143-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000074.

Copy number variation and susceptibility to human disorders (Review).

Shastry BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University, Rochester, MI, USA.
shastry@oakland.edu.

A large number of analyses of a new form of genetic variation, known as copy
number variation (CNV), have been published recently as a new tool for
understanding the genetic basis of complex traits such as diabetes, asthma,
Crohn's disease, autism and bipolar disorder. Through the use of different types 
of genome-wide scanning procedures, CNVs have been shown to be associated with
several complex and common disorders, including nervous system disorders. One of 
the common features of the regions associated with the complex and common
disorders identified thus far is the presence of CNVs and segmental duplications.
Segmental duplications lead to genome instability. Because of their location and 
nature (several contain genes), many CNVs have functional consequences, such as
gene dosage alteration, the disruption of genes and the modulation of the
activities of other genes. Therefore, these genetic variations have an influence 
on phenotypes, the susceptibility of an individual to disease, drug response and 
human genome evolution. These types of variants (gain and loss of DNA) are not
restricted to humans, having also been identified in other organisms. Our current
knowledge regarding CNVs and their heritability is still rudimentary, due to
their location in regions of complex genomic structure and to the technical
limitations of association studies. Future advances in the technology will aid in
the construction of a new CNV map, used to find the genes underlying common
diseases and to understand familial genetic conditions, severe developmental
defects in humans and other organisms, and genome evolution.

PMID: 21475803  [PubMed]


16. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 15;18(8):1497-503. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp043. Epub 2009 Jan
29.

Support for the involvement of large copy number variants in the pathogenesis of 
schizophrenia.

Kirov G(1), Grozeva D, Norton N, Ivanov D, Mantripragada KK, Holmans P;
International Schizophrenia Consortium; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium,
Craddock N, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff,
UK.

We investigated the involvement of rare (<1%) copy number variants (CNVs) in 471 
cases of schizophrenia and 2792 controls that had been genotyped using the
Affymetrix GeneChip 500K Mapping Array. Large CNVs >1 Mb were 2.26 times more
common in cases (P = 0.00027), with the effect coming mostly from deletions (odds
ratio, OR = 4.53, P = 0.00013) although duplications were also more common (OR = 
1.71, P = 0.04). Two large deletions were found in two cases each, but in no
controls: a deletion at 22q11.2 known to be a susceptibility factor for
schizophrenia and a deletion on 17p12, at 14.0-15.4 Mb. The latter is known to
cause hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies. The same deletion
was found in 6 of 4618 (0.13%) cases and 6 of 36 092 (0.017%) controls in the
re-analysed data of two recent large CNV studies of schizophrenia (OR = 7.82, P =
0.001), with the combined significance level for all three studies achieving P = 
5 x 10(-5). One large duplication on 16p13.1, which has been previously
implicated as a susceptibility factor for autism, was found in three cases and
six controls (0.6% versus 0.2%, OR = 2.98, P = 0.13). We also provide the first
support for a recently reported association between deletions at 15q11.2 and
schizophrenia (P = 0.026). This study confirms the involvement of rare CNVs in
the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and contributes to the growing list of specific
CNVs that are implicated.

PMCID: PMC2664144
PMID: 19181681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;27(6):654-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2010.06.011.

[Copy number variation analysis of a Chinese Han family with autism spectrum
disorder].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan G(1), Liang Y, Wang Y, Huang W, Zou X, Zhong N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the copy number variation (CNV) in a Chinese Han autistic
spectrum disorder (ASD) pedigree.
METHODS: The pedigree involved six siblings, and three of them were autistic. B
lymphocytes of the pedigree were immortalized with EBV and used as studying
materials. Karyotyping and Affymatrix 500k SNP chip assay were performed to
assess the genetic defects among the members of the pedigree.
RESULTS: Karyotyping indicated that the chromosomes were normal. However, the
15q11 locus was located as de novo CNV region in all autistic siblings of the
pedigree. In this locus, the fragment in 19827281-19998230 illustrated "loss" of 
CNV, while other three fragments with 37 kb, 1316 kb and 37 kb indicated "gain"
of CNV.
CONCLUSION: In this study, olfactory genes OR11K1P, OR4Q1P, OR4H6P, OR4M2, etc.
in the sites with loss and gain of CNV may provide a new clue for genetic
research of autism spectrum disorder.

PMID: 21154326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):618-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.004. Epub
2010 Nov 4.

Deletion 17q12 is a recurrent copy number variant that confers high risk of
autism and schizophrenia.

Moreno-De-Luca D(1); SGENE Consortium, Mulle JG; Simons Simplex Collection
Genetics Consortium, Kaminsky EB, Sanders SJ; GeneSTAR, Myers SM, Adam MP, Pakula
AT, Eisenhauer NJ, Uhas K, Weik L, Guy L, Care ME, Morel CF, Boni C, Salbert BA, 
Chandrareddy A, Demmer LA, Chow EW, Surti U, Aradhya S, Pickering DL, Golden DM, 
Sanger WG, Aston E, Brothman AR, Gliem TJ, Thorland EC, Ackley T, Iyer R, Huang
S, Barber JC, Crolla JA, Warren ST, Martin CL, Ledbetter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. daniel.morenodeluca@emory.edu

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):121.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia are neurodevelopmental
disorders for which recent evidence indicates an important etiologic role for
rare copy number variants (CNVs) and suggests common genetic mechanisms. We
performed cytogenomic array analysis in a discovery sample of patients with
neurodevelopmental disorders referred for clinical testing. We detected a
recurrent 1.4 Mb deletion at 17q12, which harbors HNF1B, the gene responsible for
renal cysts and diabetes syndrome (RCAD), in 18/15,749 patients, including
several with ASD, but 0/4,519 controls. We identified additional shared
phenotypic features among nine patients available for clinical assessment,
including macrocephaly, characteristic facial features, renal anomalies, and
neurocognitive impairments. In a large follow-up sample, the same deletion was
identified in 2/1,182 ASD/neurocognitive impairment and in 4/6,340 schizophrenia 
patients, but in 0/47,929 controls (corrected p = 7.37 Ã 10â»âµ). These data
demonstrate that deletion 17q12 is a recurrent, pathogenic CNV that confers a
very high risk for ASD and schizophrenia and show that one or more of the 15
genes in the deleted interval is dosage sensitive and essential for normal brain 
development and function. In addition, the phenotypic features of patients with
this CNV are consistent with a contiguous gene syndrome that extends beyond RCAD,
which is caused by HNF1B mutations only.

Copyright Â© 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2978962
PMID: 21055719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;49(11):1091-104. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2010.08.009.

Genomic copy number variation in disorders of cognitive development.

Morrow EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brown University and Developmental Disorders Genetics Research Program, Emma
Pendleton Bradley Hospital, Providence, RI, USA. eric_morrow@brown.edu

OBJECTIVE: To highlight recent discoveries in the area of genomic copy number
variation in neuropsychiatric disorders including intellectual disability,
autism, and schizophrenia. To emphasize new principles emerging from this area,
involving the genetic architecture of disease, pathophysiology, and diagnosis.
METHOD: Review of studies published in PubMed including classic studies of
genomic disorders and microarray and copy number studies in normal controls,
intellectual disability, autism, and schizophrenia.
RESULTS: The advent of novel microarray technology has led to a revolution in the
discovery of classic and novel copy number variants (CNVs) in various disorders
affecting cognitive development. Across autism and schizophrenia, global CNV
burden and de novo CNV burden are associated with disease. Also, specific
recurrent CNVs may be associated with several DSM conditions. Each condition is
also associated with heterogeneous and individually rare CNVs.
CONCLUSIONS: CNVs play an important role in the genetic architecture of the
childhood neuropsychiatric disorders discussed. This discovery appears to suggest
an important role for the strict regulation of gene dosage in the
neurodevelopmental roots of these conditions. Microarrays have emerged as
high-yield tests in the diagnosis and molecular subtyping of the childhood-onset 
disorders involving cognitive development. In summary, CNV studies in disorders
of cognitive development have revealed interesting and important new insights and
have opened an avenue of investigation that holds great promise for
neuropsychiatric disease.

Copyright Â© 2010 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3137887
PMID: 20970697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Brain Res. 2011 Mar 22;1380:138-45. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.101. Epub
2010 Oct 1.

Brain growth across the life span in autism: age-specific changes in anatomical
pathology.

Courchesne E(1), Campbell K, Solso S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Autism Center of Excellence, University of
California, San Diego, CA, USA. ecourchesne@ucsd.edu

Autism is marked by overgrowth of the brain at the earliest ages but not at older
ages when decreases in structural volumes and neuron numbers are observed
instead. This has led to the theory of age-specific anatomic abnormalities in
autism. Here we report age-related changes in brain size in autistic and typical 
subjects from 12 months to 50 years of age based on analyses of 586 longitudinal 
and cross-sectional MRI scans. This dataset is several times larger than the
largest autism study to date. Results demonstrate early brain overgrowth during
infancy and the toddler years in autistic boys and girls, followed by an
accelerated rate of decline in size and perhaps degeneration from adolescence to 
late middle age in this disorder. We theorize that underlying these age-specific 
changes in anatomic abnormalities in autism, there may also be age-specific
changes in gene expression, molecular, synaptic, cellular, and circuit
abnormalities. A peak age for detecting and studying the earliest fundamental
biological underpinnings of autism is prenatal life and the first three postnatal
years. Studies of the older autistic brain may not address original causes but
are essential to discovering how best to help the older aging autistic person.
Lastly, the theory of age-specific anatomic abnormalities in autism has broad
implications for a wide range of work on the disorder including the design,
validation, and interpretation of animal model, lymphocyte gene expression, brain
gene expression, and genotype/CNV-anatomic phenotype studies.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20920490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1401-8. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61109-9. Epub
2010 Sep 29.

Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications in attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder: a genome-wide analysis.

Williams NM(1), Zaharieva I, Martin A, Langley K, Mantripragada K, Fossdal R,
Stefansson H, Stefansson K, Magnusson P, Gudmundsson OO, Gustafsson O, Holmans P,
Owen MJ, O'Donovan M, Thapar A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre in Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics and Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Cardiff, UK. williamsnm@cf.ac.uk

Comment in
    Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1367-8.
    Lancet. 2011 Jan 29;377(9763):377-8; author reply 378.
    Lancet. 2011 Jan 29;377(9763):378-9.
    Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1364.

BACKGROUND: Large, rare chromosomal deletions and duplications known as copy
number variants (CNVs) have been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders
similar to attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We aimed to establish
whether burden of CNVs was increased in ADHD, and to investigate whether
identified CNVs were enriched for loci previously identified in autism and
schizophrenia.
METHODS: We undertook a genome-wide analysis of CNVs in 410 children with ADHD
and 1156 unrelated ethnically matched controls from the 1958 British Birth
Cohort. Children of white UK origin, aged 5-17 years, who met diagnostic criteria
for ADHD or hyperkinetic disorder, but not schizophrenia and autism, were
recruited from community child psychiatry and paediatric outpatient clinics.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in the ADHD and control
groups with two arrays; CNV analysis was limited to SNPs common to both arrays
and included only samples with high-quality data. CNVs in the ADHD group were
validated with comparative genomic hybridisation. We assessed the genome-wide
burden of large (>500 kb), rare (<1% population frequency) CNVs according to the 
average number of CNVs per sample, with significance assessed via permutation.
Locus-specific tests of association were undertaken for test regions defined for 
all identified CNVs and for 20 loci implicated in autism or schizophrenia.
Findings were replicated in 825 Icelandic patients with ADHD and 35,243 Icelandic
controls.
FINDINGS: Data for full analyses were available for 366 children with ADHD and
1047 controls. 57 large, rare CNVs were identified in children with ADHD and 78
in controls, showing a significantly increased rate of CNVs in ADHD (0Â·156 vs
0Â·075; p=8Â·9Ã10(-5)). This increased rate of CNVs was particularly high in those 
with intellectual disability (0Â·424; p=2Â·0Ã10(-6)), although there was also a
significant excess in cases with no such disability (0Â·125, p=0Â·0077). An excess 
of chromosome 16p13.11 duplications was noted in the ADHD group (p=0Â·0008 after
correction for multiple testing), a finding that was replicated in the Icelandic 
sample (p=0Â·031). CNVs identified in our ADHD cohort were significantly enriched 
for loci previously reported in both autism (p=0Â·0095) and schizophrenia
(p=0Â·010).
INTERPRETATION: Our findings provide genetic evidence of an increased rate of
large CNVs in individuals with ADHD and suggest that ADHD is not purely a social 
construct.
FUNDING: Action Research; Baily Thomas Charitable Trust; Wellcome Trust; UK
Medical Research Council; European Union.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2965350
PMID: 20888040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Brain Res. 2011 Mar 22;1380:85-97. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.046. Epub 2010
Sep 21.

Gene and miRNA expression profiles in autism spectrum disorders.

Ghahramani Seno MM(1), Hu P, Gwadry FG, Pinto D, Marshall CR, Casallo G, Scherer 
SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Accumulating data indicate that there is significant genetic heterogeneity
underlying the etiology in individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD). Some rare and highly-penetrant gene variants and copy number variation
(CNV) regions including NLGN3, NLGN4, NRXN1, SHANK2, SHANK3, PTCHD1, 1q21.1,
maternally-inherited duplication of 15q11-q13, 16p11.2, amongst others, have been
identified to be involved in ASD. Genome-wide association studies have identified
other apparently low risk loci and in some other cases, ASD arises as a co-morbid
phenotype with other medical genetic conditions (e.g. fragile X). The progress
studying the genetics of ASD has largely been accomplished using genomic analyses
of germline-derived DNA. Here, we used gene and miRNA expression profiling using 
cell-line derived total RNA to evaluate possible transcripts and networks of
molecules involved in ASD. Our analysis identified several novel dysregulated
genes and miRNAs in ASD compared with controls, including HEY1, SOX9, miR-486 and
miR-181b. All of these are involved in nervous system development and function
and some others, for example, are involved in NOTCH signaling networks (e.g.
HEY1). Further, we found significant enrichment in molecules associated with
neurological disorders such as Rett syndrome and those associated with nervous
system development and function including long-term potentiation. Our data will
provide a valuable resource for discovery purposes and for comparison to other
gene expression-based, genome-wide DNA studies and other functional data.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20868653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genome Res. 2010 Nov;20(11):1469-81. doi: 10.1101/gr.107680.110. Epub 2010 Sep
14.

De novo rates and selection of large copy number variation.

Itsara A(1), Wu H, Smith JD, Nickerson DA, Romieu I, London SJ, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

While copy number variation (CNV) is an active area of research, de novo mutation
rates within human populations are not well characterized. By focusing on large
(>100 kbp) events, we estimate the rate of de novo CNV formation in humans by
analyzing 4394 transmissions from human pedigrees with and without neurocognitive
disease. We show that a significant limitation in directly measuring genome-wide 
CNV mutation is accessing DNA derived from primary tissues as opposed to cell
lines. We conservatively estimated the genome-wide CNV mutation rate using single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarrays to analyze whole-blood derived DNA from
asthmatic trios, a collection in which we observed no elevation in the prevalence
of large CNVs. At a resolution of â¼30 kb, nine de novo CNVs were observed from
772 transmissions, corresponding to a mutation rate of Î¼ = 1.2 Ã 10(-2) CNVs per 
genome per transmission (Î¼ = 6.5 Ã 10(-3) for CNVs >500 kb). Combined with
previous estimates of CNV prevalence and assuming a model of mutation-selection
balance, we estimate significant purifying selection for large (>500 kb) events
at the genome-wide level to be s = 0.16. Supporting this, we identify de novo
CNVs in 717 multiplex autism pedigrees from the AGRE collection and observe a
fourfold enrichment (P = 1.4 Ã 10(-3)) for de novo CNVs in cases of multiplex
autism versus unaffected siblings, suggesting that many de novo CNV mutations
contribute a subtle, but significant risk for autism. We observe no parental bias
in the origin or transmission of CNVs among any of the cohorts studied.

PMCID: PMC2963811
PMID: 20841430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Psychiatr Genet. 2010 Oct;20(5):229-68. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32833d17c3.

Selected summaries from the XVII World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, San
Diego, California, USA, 4-8 November 2009.

Amstadter AB, Balachandar V, Bergen SE, Ceulemans S, Christensen JH, Cole J,
Dagdan E, De Luca V, Ducci F, Tee SF, Hartz S, Keers R, Medland S, Melas PA,
MÃ¼hleisen TW, Ozomaro U, Pidsley R, Scott AP, Sha L, Talati A, Teltsh O, Videtic 
A, Wang K, Wong CC, Delisi LE.

Erratum in
    Psychiatr Genet. 2011 Feb;21(1):55. Dagdan, Elif [added].

The XVII World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, sponsored by The International
Society of Psychiatric Genetics (ISPG) took place in San Diego, California from 4
to 8 November 2009. Approximately 550 participants gathered to discuss the latest
molecular genetic findings relevant to serious mental illness, including
schizophrenia, mood disorders, substance abuse, autism, and attention deficit
disorder. Recent advances in the field were discussed, including the genome-wide 
association studies results, copy number variation (CNV) in the genome, genomic
imaging, and large multicenter collaborations. The following report, written by
junior travel awardees who were assigned sessions as rapporteurs represents some 
of the areas covered in oral presentation during the conference, and reports on
some of the notable major new findings described at this 2009 World Congress of
Psychiatric Genetics.

PMID: 20706171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Aug 13;87(2):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.013.

Microdeletions of 3q29 confer high risk for schizophrenia.

Mulle JG(1), Dodd AF, McGrath JA, Wolyniec PS, Mitchell AA, Shetty AC, Sobreira
NL, Valle D, Rudd MK, Satten G, Cutler DJ, Pulver AE, Warren ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. jmulle@emory.edu

Schizophrenia (SZ) is a severe psychiatric illness that affects approximately 1% 
of the population and has a strong genetic underpinning. Recently, genome-wide
analysis of copy-number variation (CNV) has implicated rare and de novo events as
important in SZ. Here, we report a genome-wide analysis of 245 SZ cases and 490
controls, all of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Because many studies have found an
excess burden of large, rare deletions in cases, we limited our analysis to
deletions over 500 kb in size. We observed seven large, rare deletions in cases, 
with 57% of these being de novo. We focused on one 836 kb de novo deletion at
chromosome 3q29 that falls within a 1.3-1.6 Mb deletion previously identified in 
children with intellectual disability (ID) and autism, because increasing
evidence suggests an overlap of specific rare copy-number variants (CNVs) between
autism and SZ. By combining our data with prior CNV studies of SZ and analysis of
the data of the Genetic Association Information Network (GAIN), we identified six
3q29 deletions among 7545 schizophrenic subjects and one among 39,748 controls,
resulting in a statistically significant association with SZ (p = 0.02) and an
odds ratio estimate of 17 (95% confidence interval: 1.36-1198.4). Moreover, this 
3q29 deletion region contains two linkage peaks from prior SZ family studies, and
the minimal deletion interval implicates 20 annotated genes, including PAK2 and
DLG1, both paralogous to X-linked ID genes and now strong candidates for SZ
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2917706
PMID: 20691406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Psychiatr Danub. 2010 Jun;22(2):190-2.

New technologies provide insights into genetic basis of psychiatric disorders and
explain their co-morbidity.

Rudan I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Croatian Centre for Global Health, The University of Edinburgh, UK.
irudan@hotmail.com

The completion of Human Genome Project and the "HapMap" project was followed by
translational activities from companies within the private sector. This led to
the introduction of genome-wide scans based on hundreds of thousands of single
nucleotide polymorphysms (SNP). These scans were based on common genetic variants
in human populations. This new and powerful technology was then applied to the
existing DNA-based datasets with information on psychiatric disorders. As a
result, an unprecedented amount of novel scientific insights related to the
underlying biology and genetics of psychiatric disorders was obtained. The
dominant design of these studies, so called "genome-wide association studies"
(GWAS), used statistical methods which minimized the risk of false positive
reports and provided much greater power to detect genotype-phenotype
associations. All findings were entirely data-driven rather than
hypothesis-driven, which often made it difficult for researchers to understand or
interpret the findings. Interestingly, this work in genetics is indicating how
non-specific some genes are for psychiatric disorders, having associations in
common for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and autism. This suggests that the
earlier stages of psychiatric disorders may be multi-valent and that early
detection, coupled with a clearer understanding of the environmental factors, may
allow prevention. At the present time, the rich "harvest" from GWAS still has
very limited power to predict the variation in psychiatric disease status at
individual level, typically explaining less than 5% of the total risk variance.
The most recent studies of common genetic variation implicated the role of major 
histocompatibility complex in schizophrenia and other disorders. They also
provided molecular evidence for a substantial polygenic component to the risk of 
psychiatric diseases, involving thousands of common alleles of very small effect.
The studies of structural genetic variation, such as copy number variants (CNV), 
coupled with the efforts targeting rare genetic variation (using the emerging
whole-genome "deep" sequencing technologies) will become the area of the greatest
interest in the field of genetic epidemiology. This will be complemented by the
studies of epigenetic phoenomena, changes of expression at a large scale and
understanding gene-gene interactions in complex networks using systems biology
approaches. A deeper understanding of the underlying biology of psychiatric
disorders is essential to improve diagnoses and therapies of these diseases. New 
technologies - genome-wide association studies, imaging and the optical
manipulation of neural circuits - are promising to provide novel insights and
lead to new treatments.

PMID: 20562745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Genet. 2010 Aug;128(2):179-94. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0837-0. Epub 2010 May 
29.

Outcome of array CGH analysis for 255 subjects with intellectual disability and
search for candidate genes using bioinformatics.

Qiao Y(1), Harvard C, Tyson C, Liu X, Fawcett C, Pavlidis P, Holden JJ, Lewis ME,
Rajcan-Separovic E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (Cytogenetics), Child and Family Research Institute,
University of British Columbia (UBC), 950 West 28th, Room 3060, Vancouver, BC,
V5Z 4H4, Canada.

Array CGH enables the detection of pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) in
5-15% of individuals with intellectual disability (ID), making it a promising
tool for uncovering ID candidate genes. However, most CNVs encompass multiple
genes, making it difficult to identify key disease gene(s) underlying ID
etiology. Using array CGH we identified 47 previously unreported unique CNVs in
45/255 probands. We prioritized ID candidate genes using five bioinformatic gene 
prioritization web tools. Gene priority lists were created by comparing integral 
genes from each CNV from our ID cohort with sets of training genes specific
either to ID or randomly selected. Our findings suggest that different training
sets alter gene prioritization only moderately; however, only the ID gene
training set resulted in significant enrichment of genes with nervous system
function (19%) in prioritized versus non-prioritized genes from the same de novo 
CNVs (7%, p < 0.05). This enrichment further increased to 31% when the five web
tools were used in concert and included genes within mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathways. Gene
prioritization web tools enrich for genes with relevant function in ID and more
readily facilitate the selection of ID candidate genes for functional studies,
particularly for large CNVs.

PMID: 20512354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Apr 22;6(4):e1000752. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000752.

Accurate distinction of pathogenic from benign CNVs in mental retardation.

Hehir-Kwa JY(1), Wieskamp N, Webber C, Pfundt R, Brunner HG, Gilissen C, de Vries
BB, Ponting CP, Veltman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Human Genetics,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;10(6):717-21.

Copy number variants (CNVs) have recently been recognized as a common form of
genomic variation in humans. Hundreds of CNVs can be detected in any individual
genome using genomic microarrays or whole genome sequencing technology, but their
phenotypic consequences are still poorly understood. Rare CNVs have been reported
as a frequent cause of neurological disorders such as mental retardation (MR),
schizophrenia and autism, prompting widespread implementation of CNV screening in
diagnostics. In previous studies we have shown that, in contrast to benign CNVs, 
MR-associated CNVs are significantly enriched in genes whose mouse orthologues,
when disrupted, result in a nervous system phenotype. In this study we developed 
and validated a novel computational method for differentiating between benign and
MR-associated CNVs using structural and functional genomic features to annotate
each CNV. In total 13 genomic features were included in the final version of a
NaÃ¯ve Bayesian Tree classifier, with LINE density and mouse knock-out phenotypes 
contributing most to the classifier's accuracy. After demonstrating that our
method (called GECCO) perfectly classifies CNVs causing known MR-associated
syndromes, we show that it achieves high accuracy (94%) and negative predictive
value (99%) on a blinded test set of more than 1,200 CNVs from a large cohort of 
individuals with MR. These results indicate that this classification method will 
be of value for objectively prioritizing CNVs in clinical research and
diagnostics.

PMCID: PMC2858682
PMID: 20421931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010 Apr;67(4):318-27. doi:
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.25.

Rare copy number variants: a point of rarity in genetic risk for bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia.

Grozeva D(1), Kirov G, Ivanov D, Jones IR, Jones L, Green EK, St Clair DM, Young 
AH, Ferrier N, Farmer AE, McGuffin P, Holmans PA, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Craddock
N; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium.

Collaborators: Burton PR, Cardon LR, Clayton DG, Craddock N, Deloukas P,
Duncanson A, Kwiatkowski DP, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand WH, Samani NJ, Todd JA,
Donnelly P, Barrett JC, Burton PR, Davison D, Donnelly P, Easton D, Evans DM,
Leung HT, Marchini JL, Morris AP, Spencer CC, Tobin MD, Cardon LR, Clayton DG,
Attwood AP, Boorman JP, Cant B, Hussey JM, Jolley JD, Knight AS, Koch K, Meech E,
Nutland S, Ouwehand WH, Prowse CV, Stevens HE, Taylor NC, Todd JA, Walker NM,
Walters GR, Watkins NA, Winzer T, Jones RW, McArdle WL, Ring SM, Pembrey M,
Strachan DP, Breen G, St Clair DM, Caesar S, Gordon-Smith K, Jones L, Craddock N,
Fraser C, Green EK, Grozeva D, Hamshere ML, Holmans PA, Jones IR, Kirov G,
Moskvina V, Nikolov I, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Collier DA, Elkin A, Farmer AE,
McGuffin P, Williamson R, Ferrier N, Young AH, Ball SG, Balmforth AJ, Barrett JH,
Bishop DT, Hall AS, Iles MM, Maqbool A, Yuldasheva N, Braund PS, Dixon RJ,
Mangino M, Samani NJ, Stevens S, Burton PR, Tobin MD, Thompson JR, Bredi F,
Parkes M, Tremelling M, Drummond H, Lees CW, Nimmo ER, Satsangi J, Fisher SA,
Lewis CM, Mathew CG, Onnie CM, Prescott NJ, Forbes A, Sanderson J, Barbour J,
Mansfield JC, Mohiuddin MK, Todhunter CE, Ahmad T, Cummings FR, Jewell DP,
Webster J, Brown MJ, Clayton DG, Lathrop GM, Connell J, Dominiczak A, Samani NJ, 
Marcano CA, Burke B, Caulfield M, Dobson R, Gungadoo J, Lee KL, Munroe PB,
Newhouse SJ, Onipinla A, Wallace C, Xue M, Farrall M, Barton A, Bruce IN, Donovan
H, Eyre S, Gilbert PD, Hider SL, Hinks AM, John SL, Potter C, Silman AJ, Symmons 
DP, Thomson W, Worthington J, Clayton DG, Nutland S, Stevens HE, Todd JA, Walker 
NM, Dunger DB, Widmer B, Frayling TM, Freathy RM, Hattersley AT, Lango H, Perry
JR, Weedon MN, Shields BM, Hitman GA, Walker M, Elliott KS, Lindgren CM, McCarthy
MI, Rayner NW, Zeggini E, Groves CJ, Timpson NJ, Newport M, Sirugo G, Hill AV,
Lyons E, Vannberg F, Bradbury LA, Pointon JJ, Farrar C, Wordsworth P, Brown MA,
Franklyn JA, Gough SC, Heward JM, Simmonds MJ, Rahman N, Seal S, Stratton MR, Ban
M, Compston A, Goris A, Sawcer SJ, Conway D, Jallow M, Newport M, Sirugo G,
Rockett KA, Kwiatkowski DP, Bumpstead SJ, Chaney A, Deloukas P, Downes K, Ghori
MJ, Gwilliam R, Hunt SE, Inouye M, Keniry A, King E, McGinnis R, Potter S,
Ravindrarajah R, Whittaker P, Widden C, Withers D, Leung HT, Nutland S, Stevens
HE, Todd JA, Walker NM, Easton D, Clayton DG, Burton PR, Tobin MD, Barrett JC,
Cardon LR, Evans DM, Morris AP, Cardin NJ, Davison D, Ferreira T, HallgrimsdÃ³ttir
IB, Howie BN, Marchini JL, Pereira-Gale J, Spencer CC, Su Z, Teo YY, Vukcevic D, 
Donnelly P, Bentley D, Brown MA, Cardon LR, Caulfield M, Clayton DG, Compston A, 
Craddock N, Deloukas P, Donnelly P, Farrall M, Gough SC, Hall AS, Hattersley AT, 
Hill AV, Kwiatkowski DP, Mathew CG, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand WH, Parkes M, Pembrey
M, Rahman N, Samani NJ, Stratton MR, Todd JA, Worthington J.

CONTEXT: Recent studies suggest that copy number variation in the human genome is
extensive and may play an important role in susceptibility to disease, including 
neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and autism. The possible
involvement of copy number variants (CNVs) in bipolar disorder has received
little attention to date.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether large (>100,000 base pairs) and rare (found in
<1% of the population) CNVs are associated with susceptibility to bipolar
disorder and to compare with findings in schizophrenia.
DESIGN: A genome-wide survey of large, rare CNVs in a case-control sample using a
high-density microarray.
SETTING: The Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium.
PARTICIPANTS: There were 1697 cases of bipolar disorder and 2806 nonpsychiatric
controls. All participants were white UK residents.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Overall load of CNVs and presence of rare CNVs.
RESULTS: The burden of CNVs in bipolar disorder was not increased compared with
controls and was significantly less than in schizophrenia cases. The CNVs
previously implicated in the etiology of schizophrenia were not more common in
cases with bipolar disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder differ with respect to CNV burden
in general and association with specific CNVs in particular. Our data are
consistent with the possibility that possession of large, rare deletions may
modify the phenotype in those at risk of psychosis: those possessing such events 
are more likely to be diagnosed as having schizophrenia, and those without them
are more likely to be diagnosed as having bipolar disorder.

PMID: 20368508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Med Genet. 2010 Mar-Apr;53(2):93-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.01.004. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Interstitial microduplication of Xp22.31: Causative of intellectual disability or
benign copy number variant?

Li F(1), Shen Y, KÃ¶hler U, Sharkey FH, Menon D, Coulleaux L, Malan V, Rio M,
McMullan DJ, Cox H, Fagan KA, Gaunt L, Metcalfe K, Heinrich U, Hislop G, Maye U, 
Sutcliffe M, Wu BL, Thiel BD, Mulchandani S, Conlin LK, Spinner NB, Murphy KM,
Batista DA.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

The use of comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays has dramatically altered the approach to identification
of genetic alterations that can explain intellectual disability and /or
congenital anomalies. However, the discovery of numerous copy number changes with
benign or unknown clinical significance has made interpretation problematic.
Submicroscopic duplication of Xp22.31 has been reported as either a possible
cause of intellectual disability and/or developmental delay or a benign variant. 
Here we report 29 individuals with the microduplication found as part of
microarray analysis of 7793 samples submitted to an international group of 13
clinical laboratories. The referral reasons varied and included developmental
delay, intellectual disability, autism, dysmorphic features and/or multiple
congenital anomalies. The size of the Xp22.31 duplication varied between 149 kb
and 1.74 Mb and included the steroid sulfatase (STS) gene with the male to female
ratio of 0.7. Duplication within this segment is seen at a frequency of 0.15% in 
a healthy control population, whereas a frequency of 0.37% was observed in our
cohort of individuals with abnormal phenotypes. We present a detailed comparison 
of the breakpoints, inheritance, X-inactivation and clinical phenotype in our
cohort and a review of the literature for a total of 41 patients. To date, this
report is the largest compilation of clinical and array data regarding the
microduplication of Xp22.31 and will serve to broaden the knowledge of regions
involving copy number variation (CNV).

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20132918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 26;107 Suppl 1:1765-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906222107. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Evolution in health and medicine Sackler colloquium: Genomic disorders: a window 
into human gene and genome evolution.

Carvalho CM(1), Zhang F, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Gene duplications alter the genetic constitution of organisms and can be a
driving force of molecular evolution in humans and the great apes. In this
context, the study of genomic disorders has uncovered the essential role played
by the genomic architecture, especially low copy repeats (LCRs) or segmental
duplications (SDs). In fact, regardless of the mechanism, LCRs can mediate or
stimulate rearrangements, inciting genomic instability and generating dynamic and
unstable regions prone to rapid molecular evolution. In humans, copy-number
variation (CNV) has been implicated in common traits such as neuropathy,
hypertension, color blindness, infertility, and behavioral traits including
autism and schizophrenia, as well as disease susceptibility to HIV, lupus
nephritis, and psoriasis among many other clinical phenotypes. The same
mechanisms implicated in the origin of genomic disorders may also play a role in 
the emergence of segmental duplications and the evolution of new genes by means
of genomic and gene duplication and triplication, exon shuffling, exon accretion,
and fusion/fission events.

PMCID: PMC2868291
PMID: 20080665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Annu Rev Med. 2010;61:437-55. doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-100708-204735.

Structural variation in the human genome and its role in disease.

Stankiewicz P(1), Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

During the last quarter of the twentieth century, our knowledge about human
genetic variation was limited mainly to the heterochromatin polymorphisms, large 
enough to be visible in the light microscope, and the single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) identified by traditional PCR-based DNA sequencing. In the
past five years, the rapid development and expanded use of microarray
technologies, including oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization
and SNP genotyping arrays, as well as next-generation sequencing with
"paired-end" methods, has enabled a whole-genome analysis with essentially
unlimited resolution. The discovery of submicroscopic copy-number variations
(CNVs) present in our genomes has changed dramatically our perspective on DNA
structural variation and disease. It is now thought that CNVs encompass more
total nucleotides and arise more frequently than SNPs. CNVs, to a larger extent
than SNPs, have been shown to be responsible for human evolution, genetic
diversity between individuals, and a rapidly increasing number of traits or
susceptibility to traits; such conditions have been referred to as genomic
disorders. In addition to well-known sporadic chromosomal microdeletion syndromes
and Mendelian diseases, many common complex traits including autism and
schizophrenia can result from CNVs. Both recombination- and replication-based
mechanisms for CNV formation have been described.

PMID: 20059347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar 1;71(5):392-402. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.09.034.
Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Rare copy number variants in tourette syndrome disrupt genes in histaminergic
pathways and overlap with autism.

Fernandez TV(1), Sanders SJ, Yurkiewicz IR, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Kim YS, Fishman
DO, Raubeson MJ, Song Y, Yasuno K, Ho WS, Bilguvar K, Glessner J, Chu SH, Leckman
JF, King RA, Gilbert DL, Heiman GA, Tischfield JA, Hoekstra PJ, Devlin B,
Hakonarson H, Mane SM, GÃ¼nel M, State MW.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar 1;71(5):390-1.

BACKGROUND: Studies of copy number variation (CNV) have characterized loci and
molecular pathways in a range of neuropsychiatric conditions. We analyzed rare
CNVs in Tourette syndrome (TS) to identify novel risk regions and relevant
pathways, to evaluate burden of structural variation in cases versus controls,
and to assess overlap of identified variations with those in other
neuropsychiatric syndromes.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study of 460 individuals with TS, including 
148 parent-child trios and 1131 controls. CNV analysis was undertaken using 370 K
to 1 M probe arrays, and genotyping data were used to match cases and controls
for ancestry. CNVs present in < 1% of the population were evaluated.
RESULTS: While there was no significant increase in the number of de novo or
transmitted rare CNVs in cases versus controls, pathway analysis using multiple
algorithms showed enrichment of genes within histamine receptor (subtypes 1 and
2) signaling pathways (p = 5.8 Ã 10(-4) - 1.6 Ã 10(-2)), as well as axon
guidance, cell adhesion, nervous system development, and synaptic structure and
function processes. Genes mapping within rare CNVs in TS showed significant
overlap with those previously identified in autism spectrum disorders but not
intellectual disability or schizophrenia. Three large, likely pathogenic, de novo
events were identified, including one disrupting multiple gamma-aminobutyric acid
receptor genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We identify further evidence supporting recent findings regarding
the involvement of histaminergic and gamma-aminobutyric acidergic mechanisms in
the etiology of TS and show an overlap of rare CNVs in TS and autism spectrum
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3282144
PMID: 22169095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(Database issue):D1016-22. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkr1145. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

AutismKB: an evidence-based knowledgebase of autism genetics.

Xu LM(1), Li JR, Huang Y, Zhao M, Tang X, Wei L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics, State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene
Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder
with a prevalence of 0.9-2.6%. Twin studies showed a heritability of 38-90%,
indicating strong genetic contributions. Yet it is unclear how many genes have
been associated with ASD and how strong the evidence is. A comprehensive review
and analysis of literature and data may bring a clearer big picture of autism
genetics. We show that as many as 2193 genes, 2806 SNPs/VNTRs, 4544 copy number
variations (CNVs) and 158 linkage regions have been associated with ASD by GWAS, 
genome-wide CNV studies, linkage analyses, low-scale genetic association studies,
expression profiling and other low-scale experimental studies. To evaluate the
evidence, we collected metadata about each study including clinical and
demographic features, experimental design and statistical significance, and used 
a scoring and ranking approach to select a core data set of 434 high-confidence
genes. The genes mapped to pathways including neuroactive ligand-receptor
interaction, synapse transmission and axon guidance. To better understand the
genes we parsed over 30 databases to retrieve extensive data about expression
patterns, protein interactions, animal models and pharmacogenetics. We
constructed a MySQL-based online database and share it with the broader autism
research community at http://autismkb.cbi.pku.edu.cn, supporting sophisticated
browsing and searching functionalities.

PMCID: PMC3245106
PMID: 22139918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Schizophr Res. 2012 Mar;135(1-3):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.11.004. Epub
2011 Nov 29.

Independent estimation of the frequency of rare CNVs in the UK population
confirms their role in schizophrenia.

Grozeva D(1), Conrad DF, Barnes CP, Hurles M, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Craddock N, 
Kirov G; WTCCC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine,
Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

BACKGROUND: Several large, rare chromosomal copy number variants (CNVs) have
recently been shown to increase risk for schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric
disorders including autism, ADHD, learning difficulties and epilepsy.
AIMS: We wanted to examine the frequencies of these schizophrenia-associated
variants in a large sample of individuals with non-psychiatric illnesses to
better understand the robustness and specificity of the association with
schizophrenia.
METHODS: We used Affymetrix 500K microarray data from 10,259 individuals from the
UK Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) who are affected with six
non-psychiatric disorders (coronary artery disease, Crohn's disease,
hypertension, rheumatoid arthritis, types 1 and 2 diabetes) to establish the
frequencies of nine CNV loci strongly implicated in schizophrenia, and compared
them with the previous findings.
RESULTS: Deletions at 1q21.1, 3q29, 15q11.2, 15q13.1 and 22q11.2 (VCFS region),
and duplications at 16p11.2 were found significantly more often in schizophrenia 
cases, compared with the WTCCC reference set. Deletions at 17p12 and 17q12, were 
also more common in schizophrenia cases but not significantly so, while
duplications at 16p13.1 were found at nearly the same rate as in previous
schizophrenia samples. The frequencies of CNVs in the WTCCC non-psychiatric
controls at three of the loci (15q11.2, 16p13.1 and 17p12) were significantly
higher than those reported in previous control populations.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence for association with schizophrenia is compelling for
six rare CNV loci, while the remaining three require further replication in large
studies. Risk at these loci extends to other neurodevelopmental disorders but
their involvement in common non-psychiatric disorders should also be
investigated.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3315675
PMID: 22130109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002334. Epub 2011
Nov 10.

Relative burden of large CNVs on a range of neurodevelopmental phenotypes.

Girirajan S(1), Brkanac Z, Coe BP, Baker C, Vives L, Vu TH, Shafer N, Bernier R, 
Ferrero GB, Silengo M, Warren ST, Moreno CS, Fichera M, Romano C, Raskind WH,
Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

While numerous studies have implicated copy number variants (CNVs) in a range of 
neurological phenotypes, the impact relative to disease severity has been
difficult to ascertain due to small sample sizes, lack of phenotypic details, and
heterogeneity in platforms used for discovery. Using a customized microarray
enriched for genomic hotspots, we assayed for large CNVs among 1,227 individuals 
with various neurological deficits including dyslexia (376), sporadic autism
(350), and intellectual disability (ID) (501), as well as 337 controls. We show
that the frequency of large CNVs (>1 Mbp) is significantly greater for
ID-associated phenotypes compared to autism (p = 9.58 Ã 10(-11), odds ratio =
4.59), dyslexia (p = 3.81 Ã 10(-18), odds ratio = 14.45), or controls (p = 2.75 Ã
10(-17), odds ratio = 13.71). There is a striking difference in the frequency of 
rare CNVs (>50 kbp) in autism (10%, p = 2.4 Ã 10(-6), odds ratio = 6) or ID (16%,
p = 3.55 Ã 10(-12), odds ratio = 10) compared to dyslexia (2%) with essentially
no difference in large CNV burden among dyslexia patients compared to controls.
Rare CNVs were more likely to arise de novo (64%) in ID when compared to autism
(40%) or dyslexia (0%). We observed a significantly increased large CNV burden in
individuals with ID and multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) compared to ID alone 
(p = 0.001, odds ratio = 2.54). Our data suggest that large CNV burden positively
correlates with the severity of childhood disability: ID with MCA being most
severely affected and dyslexics being indistinguishable from controls. When
autism without ID was considered separately, the increase in CNV burden was
modest compared to controls (p = 0.07, odds ratio = 2.33).

PMCID: PMC3213131
PMID: 22102821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2011;135(3-4):228-40. doi: 10.1159/000334064. Epub 2011 Nov
12.

Disentangling the myriad genomics of complex disorders, specifically focusing on 
autism, epilepsy, and schizophrenia.

Poot M(1), van der Smagt JJ, Brilstra EH, Bourgeron T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands. m.poot@umcutrecht.nl

Analyses of structural genome variation by array-CGH have dramatically enhanced
our ability to detect copy number variations (CNVs). De novo CNVs and those
co-segregating with disease in a family are generally interpreted as pathogenic. 
Yet, often CNVs, such as recurrent microdeletions in region 15q13.3, are not so
clearly pathogenic. Here we discuss potential confounding mechanisms that may
lead to the phenotypic pleiotropy of CNVs, such as unmasking of recessive alleles
by hemizygous deletions, interaction of CNVs with other loci and genes, genetic
epistasis, allelic exclusion, and somatic mosaicism. We illustrate some of these 
mechanisms with a detailed analysis of recent studies of CNVs involving MCPH1,
AUTS2, CNTNAP2, and mutations in GRIN2B. Next we discuss the clinical
ramifications of these findings and urge workers to avoid 'diagnostic fatalism'
(i.e., halting all genetic investigation after the detection of a single CNV) and
address some of the future challenges likely to result from implementations of
next generation sequencing techniques.

Copyright Â© 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22085975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27134. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027134. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

GALC deletions increase the risk of primary open-angle glaucoma: the role of
Mendelian variants in complex disease.

Liu Y(1), Gibson J, Wheeler J, Kwee LC, Santiago-Turla CM, Akafo SK, Lichter PR, 
Gaasterland DE, Moroi SE, Challa P, Herndon LW, Girkin CA, Budenz DL, Richards
JE, Allingham RR, Hauser MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America. yutao.liu@duke.edu

DNA copy number variants (CNVs) have been reported in many human diseases
including autism and schizophrenia. Primary Open Angle Glaucoma (POAG) is a
complex adult-onset disorder characterized by progressive optic neuropathy and
vision loss. Previous studies have identified rare CNVs in POAG; however, their
low frequencies prevented formal association testing. We present here the
association between POAG risk and a heterozygous deletion in the
galactosylceramidase gene (GALC). This CNV was initially identified in a dataset 
containing 71 Caucasian POAG cases and 478 ethnically matched controls obtained
from dbGAP (study accession phs000126.v1.p1.) (p = 0.017, fisher's exact test).
It was validated with array comparative genomic hybridization (arrayCGH) and
realtime PCR, and replicated in an independent POAG dataset containing 959 cases 
and 1852 controls (p = 0.021, OR (odds ratio) = 3.5, 95% CI -1.1-12.0). Evidence 
for association was strengthened when the discovery and replication datasets were
combined (p = 0.002; OR = 5.0, 95% CI 1.6-16.4). Several deletions with different
endpoints were identified by array CGH of POAG patients. Homozygous deletions
that eliminate GALC enzymatic activity cause Krabbe disease, a recessive
Mendelian disorder of childhood displaying bilateral optic neuropathy and vision 
loss. Our findings suggest that heterozygous deletions that reduce GALC activity 
are a novel mechanism increasing risk of POAG. This is the first report of a
statistically-significant association of a CNV with POAG risk, contributing to a 
growing body of evidence that CNVs play an important role in complex, inherited
disorders. Our findings suggest an attractive biomarker and potential therapeutic
target for patients with this form of POAG.

PMCID: PMC3208571
PMID: 22073273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2012 May;53(5):510-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-7610.2011.02478.x. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Annual research review: impact of advances in genetics in understanding
developmental psychopathology.

Addington AM(1), Rapoport JL.

Author information: 
(1)Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

It was hoped that diagnostic guidelines for, and treatment of, child psychiatric 
disorders in DSM-5 would be informed by the wealth of clinical genetic research
related to neurodevelopmental disorders. In spite of remarkable advances in
genetic technology, this has not been the case. Candidate gene, genome-wide
association, and rare copy number variant (CNV) studies have been carried out for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Autism, Tourette's Syndrome, and
schizophrenia, with intriguing results, but environmental factors, incomplete
penetrance, pleiotropy, and genetic heterogeneity, underlying any given phenotype
have limited clinical translation. One promising approach may be the use of
developmental brain imaging measures as more relevant phenotypes. This is
particularly important, as subtle abnormalities in timing and expression of gene 
pathways underlying brain development may well link these disorders and be the
ultimate target of treatments.

Â© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry Â© 2011 Association
for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.

PMID: 22067053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2011;135(3-4):174-202. doi: 10.1159/000332928. Epub 2011
Nov 2.

Genome arrays for the detection of copy number variations in idiopathic mental
retardation, idiopathic generalized epilepsy and neuropsychiatric disorders:
lessons for diagnostic workflow and research.

Hochstenbach R(1), Buizer-Voskamp JE, Vorstman JA, Ophoff RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, University
Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. phochste@umcutrecht.nl

We review the contributions and limitations of genome-wide array-based
identification of copy number variants (CNVs) in the clinical diagnostic
evaluation of patients with mental retardation (MR) and other brain-related
disorders. In unselected MR referrals a causative genomic gain or loss is
detected in 14-18% of cases. Usually, such CNVs arise de novo, are not found in
healthy subjects, and have a major impact on the phenotype by altering the dosage
of multiple genes. This high diagnostic yield justifies array-based segmental
aneuploidy screening as the initial genetic test in these patients. This also
pertains to patients with autism (expected yield about 5-10% in nonsyndromic and 
10-20% in syndromic patients) and schizophrenia (at least 5% yield). CNV studies 
in idiopathic generalized epilepsy, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder,
major depressive disorder and Tourette syndrome indicate that patients have, on
average, a larger CNV burden as compared to controls. Collectively, the CNV
studies suggest that a wide spectrum of disease-susceptibility variants exists,
most of which are rare (<0.1%) and of variable and usually small effect.
Notwithstanding, a rare CNV can have a major impact on the phenotype. Exome
sequencing in MR and autism patients revealed de novo mutations in protein coding
genes in 60 and 20% of cases, respectively. Therefore, it is likely that arrays
will be supplanted by next-generation sequencing methods as the initial and
perhaps ultimate diagnostic tool in patients with brain-related disorders,
revealing both CNVs and mutations in a single test.

Copyright Â© 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22056632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Oct 5;3(103):103ra97. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002627.

Increased gene dosage of Ube3a results in autism traits and decreased glutamate
synaptic transmission in mice.

Smith SE(1), Zhou YD, Zhang G, Jin Z, Stoppel DC, Anderson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Departments of Pathology and Neurology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

People with autism spectrum disorder are characterized by impaired social
interaction, reduced communication, and increased repetitive behaviors. The
disorder has a substantial genetic component, and recent studies have revealed
frequent genome copy number variations (CNVs) in some individuals. A common CNV
that occurs in 1 to 3% of those with autism--maternal 15q11-13 duplication
(dup15) and triplication (isodicentric extranumerary chromosome, idic15)--affects
several genes that have been suggested to underlie autism behavioral traits. To
test this, we tripled the dosage of one of these genes, the ubiquitin protein
ligase Ube3a, which is expressed solely from the maternal allele in mature
neurons, and reconstituted the three core autism traits in mice: defective social
interaction, impaired communication, and increased repetitive stereotypic
behavior. The penetrance of these autism traits depended on Ube3a gene copy
number. In animals with increased Ube3a gene dosage, glutamatergic, but not
GABAergic, synaptic transmission was suppressed as a result of reduced
presynaptic release probability, synaptic glutamate concentration, and
postsynaptic action potential coupling. These results suggest that Ube3a gene
dosage may contribute to the autism traits of individuals with maternal 15q11-13 
duplication and support the idea that increased E3A ubiquitin ligase gene dosage 
results in reduced excitatory synaptic transmission.

PMCID: PMC3356696
PMID: 21974935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 11;108(41):17076-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1114042108. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Dosage-dependent phenotypes in models of 16p11.2 lesions found in autism.

Horev G(1), Ellegood J, Lerch JP, Son YE, Muthuswamy L, Vogel H, Krieger AM, Buja
A, Henkelman RM, Wigler M, Mills AA.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

Recurrent copy number variations (CNVs) of human 16p11.2 have been associated
with a variety of developmental/neurocognitive syndromes. In particular, deletion
of 16p11.2 is found in patients with autism, developmental delay, and obesity.
Patients with deletions or duplications have a wide range of clinical features,
and siblings carrying the same deletion often have diverse symptoms. To study the
consequence of 16p11.2 CNVs in a systematic manner, we used chromosome
engineering to generate mice harboring deletion of the chromosomal region
corresponding to 16p11.2, as well as mice harboring the reciprocal duplication.
These 16p11.2 CNV models have dosage-dependent changes in gene expression,
viability, brain architecture, and behavior. For each phenotype, the consequence 
of the deletion is more severe than that of the duplication. Of particular note
is that half of the 16p11.2 deletion mice die postnatally; those that survive to 
adulthood are healthy and fertile, but have alterations in the hypothalamus and
exhibit a "behavior trap" phenotype-a specific behavior characteristic of rodents
with lateral hypothalamic and nigrostriatal lesions. These findings indicate that
16p11.2 CNVs cause brain and behavioral anomalies, providing insight into human
neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC3193230
PMID: 21969575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Nov 15;20(22):4360-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr363. Epub 2011 Aug
24.

Use of array CGH to detect exonic copy number variants throughout the genome in
autism families detects a novel deletion in TMLHE.

Celestino-Soper PB(1), Shaw CA, Sanders SJ, Li J, Murtha MT, Ercan-Sencicek AG,
Davis L, Thomson S, Gambin T, Chinault AC, Ou Z, German JR, Milosavljevic A,
Sutcliffe JS, Cook EH Jr, Stankiewicz P, State MW, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with increasing evidence of heterogeneous
genetic etiology including de novo and inherited copy number variants (CNVs). We 
performed array comparative genomic hybridization using a custom Agilent 1 M
oligonucleotide array intended to cover 197 332 unique exons in RefSeq genes; 98%
were covered by at least one probe and 95% were covered by three or more probes
with the focus on detecting relatively small CNVs that would implicate a single
protein-coding gene. The study group included 99 trios from the Simons Simplex
Collection. The analysis identified and validated 55 potentially pathogenic CNVs,
categorized as de novo autosomal heterozygous, inherited homozygous autosomal,
complex autosomal and hemizygous deletions on the X chromosome of probands.
Twenty percent (11 of 55) of these CNV calls were rare when compared with the
Database of Genomic Variants. Thirty-six percent (20 of 55) of the CNVs were also
detected in the same samples in an independent analysis using the 1 M Illumina
single-nucleotide polymorphism array. Findings of note included a common and
sometimes homozygous 61 bp exonic deletion in SLC38A10, three CNVs found in
lymphoblast-derived DNA but not present in whole-blood derived DNA and, most
importantly, in a male proband, an exonic deletion of the TMLHE (trimethyllysine 
hydroxylase epsilon) that encodes the first enzyme in the biosynthesis of
carnitine. Data for CNVs present in lymphoblasts but absent in fresh blood DNA
suggest that these represent clonal outgrowth of individual B cells with
pre-existing somatic mutations rather than artifacts arising in cell culture. GEO
accession number GSE23765 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/, date last accessed
on 30 August 2011). Genboree accession:
http://genboree.org/java-bin/gbrowser.jsp?refSeqId=1868&entryPointId=chr17&from=5
3496072&to=53694382&isPublic=yes, date last accessed on 30 August 2011.

PMCID: PMC3196886
PMID: 21865298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nat Genet. 2011 Aug 14;43(9):838-46. doi: 10.1038/ng.909.

A copy number variation morbidity map of developmental delay.

Cooper GM(1), Coe BP, Girirajan S, Rosenfeld JA, Vu TH, Baker C, Williams C,
Stalker H, Hamid R, Hannig V, Abdel-Hamid H, Bader P, McCracken E, Niyazov D,
Leppig K, Thiese H, Hummel M, Alexander N, Gorski J, Kussmann J, Shashi V,
Johnson K, Rehder C, Ballif BC, Shaffer LG, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2014 Sep;46(9):1040.

To understand the genetic heterogeneity underlying developmental delay, we
compared copy number variants (CNVs) in 15,767 children with intellectual
disability and various congenital defects (cases) to CNVs in 8,329 unaffected
adult controls. We estimate that â¼14.2% of disease in these children is caused by
CNVs >400 kb. We observed a greater enrichment of CNVs in individuals with
craniofacial anomalies and cardiovascular defects compared to those with epilepsy
or autism. We identified 59 pathogenic CNVs, including 14 new or previously
weakly supported candidates, refined the critical interval for several genomic
disorders, such as the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome, and identified 940
candidate dosage-sensitive genes. We also developed methods to opportunistically 
discover small, disruptive CNVs within the large and growing diagnostic array
datasets. This evolving CNV morbidity map, combined with exome and genome
sequencing, will be critical for deciphering the genetic basis of developmental
delay, intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorders.

PMCID: PMC3171215
PMID: 21841781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Neurogenetics. 2011 Nov;12(4):315-23. doi: 10.1007/s10048-011-0297-2. Epub 2011
Aug 12.

Social Responsiveness Scale-aided analysis of the clinical impact of copy number 
variations in autism.

van Daalen E(1), Kemner C, Verbeek NE, van der Zwaag B, Dijkhuizen T, Rump P,
Houben R, van 't Slot R, de Jonge MV, Staal WG, Beemer FA, Vorstman JA, Burbach
JP, van Amstel HK, Hochstenbach R, Brilstra EH, Poot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University Medical Centre,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Recent array-based studies have detected a wealth of copy number variations
(CNVs) in patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Since CNVs also occur in
healthy individuals, their contributions to the patient's phenotype remain
largely unclear. In a cohort of children with symptoms of ASD, diagnosis of the
index patient using ADOS-G and ADI-R was performed, and the Social Responsiveness
Scale (SRS) was administered to the index patients, both parents, and all
available siblings. CNVs were identified using SNP arrays and confirmed by FISH
or array CGH. To evaluate the clinical significance of CNVs, we analyzed three
families with multiple affected children (multiplex) and six families with a
single affected child (simplex) in which at least one child carried a CNV with a 
brain-transcribed gene. CNVs containing genes that participate in pathways
previously implicated in ASD, such as the phosphoinositol signaling pathway
(PIK3CA, GIRDIN), contactin-based networks of cell communication (CNTN6), and
microcephalin (MCPH1) were found not to co-segregate with ASD phenotypes. In one 
family, a loss of CNTN5 co-segregated with disease. This indicates that most CNVs
may by themselves not be sufficient to cause ASD, but still may contribute to the
phenotype by additive or epistatic interactions with inherited (transmitted)
mutations or non-genetic factors. Our study extends the scope of genome-wide CNV 
profiling beyond de novo CNVs in sporadic patients and may aid in uncovering
missing heritability in genome-wide screening studies of complex psychiatric
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3215885
PMID: 21837366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Aug 8;6:54. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-54.

Understanding the impact of 1q21.1 copy number variant.

Harvard C(1), Strong E, Mercier E, Colnaghi R, Alcantara D, Chow E, Martell S,
Tyson C, Hrynchak M, McGillivray B, Hamilton S, Marles S, Mhanni A, Dawson AJ,
Pavlidis P, Qiao Y, Holden JJ, Lewis SM, O'Driscoll M, Rajcan-Separovic E.

Author information: 
(1)Child and Family Research Institute, Molecular Cytogenetics and Array
Laboratory, 950 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: 1q21.1 Copy Number Variant (CNV) is associated with a highly variable
phenotype ranging from congenital anomalies, learning deficits/intellectual
disability (ID), to a normal phenotype. Hence, the clinical significance of this 
CNV can be difficult to evaluate. Here we described the consequences of the
1q21.1 CNV on genome-wide gene expression and function of selected candidate
genes within 1q21.1 using cell lines from clinically well described subjects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eight subjects from 3 families were included in the study:
six with a 1q21.1 deletion and two with a 1q21.1 duplication. High resolution
Affymetrix 2.7M array was used to refine the 1q21.1 CNV breakpoints and exclude
the presence of secondary CNVs of pathogenic relevance. Whole genome expression
profiling, studied in lymphoblast cell lines (LBCs) from 5 subjects, showed
enrichment of genes from 1q21.1 in the top 100 genes ranked based on correlation 
of expression with 1q21.1 copy number. The function of two top genes from 1q21.1,
CHD1L/ALC1 and PRKAB2, was studied in detail in LBCs from a deletion and a
duplication carrier. CHD1L/ALC1 is an enzyme with a role in chromatin
modification and DNA damage response while PRKAB2 is a member of the AMP kinase
complex, which senses and maintains systemic and cellular energy balance. The
protein levels for CHD1L/ALC1 and PRKAB2 were changed in concordance with their
copy number in both LBCs. A defect in chromatin remodeling was documented based
on impaired decatenation (chromatid untangling) checkpoint (DCC) in both LBCs.
This defect, reproduced by CHD1L/ALC1 siRNA, identifies a new role of CHD1L/ALC1 
in DCC. Both LBCs also showed elevated levels of micronuclei following treatment 
with a Topoisomerase II inhibitor suggesting increased DNA breaks. AMP kinase
function, specifically in the deletion containing LBCs, was attenuated.
CONCLUSION: Our studies are unique as they show for the first time that the
1q21.1 CNV not only causes changes in the expression of its key integral genes,
associated with changes at the protein level, but also results in changes in
their known function, in the case of AMPK, and newly identified function such as 
DCC activation in the case of CHD1L/ALC1. Our results support the use of patient 
lymphoblasts for dissecting the functional sequelae of genes integral to CNVs in 
carrier cell lines, ultimately enhancing understanding of biological processes
which may contribute to the clinical phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3180300
PMID: 21824431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002118. Epub 2011 
Jun 16.

Recurrent chromosome 16p13.1 duplications are a risk factor for aortic
dissections.

Kuang SQ(1), Guo DC, Prakash SK, McDonald ML, Johnson RJ, Wang M, Regalado ES,
Russell L, Cao JM, Kwartler C, Fraivillig K, Coselli JS, Safi HJ, Estrera AL,
Leal SM, Lemaire SA, Belmont JW, Milewicz DM; GenTAC Investigators.

Collaborators: Holmes KW, Dietz HC, Ravekes W, Lurman K, Milewicz DM, Carlson A, 
LeMaire SA, Volguina I, Song HK, Menashe V, Kushner JD, Pyeritz RE, Bavaria JE,
Basson CT, Devereux R, Weinsaft JW, McDermott D, Eagle K, Eser Tolunay H,
Desvigne- Nickens P, Stylianou MP, Mitchell M, Kroner BL, Brambilla D, Hendershot
T, Ringer D, Cunningham M, Kindem M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.

Chromosomal deletions or reciprocal duplications of the 16p13.1 region have been 
implicated in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism,
schizophrenia, epilepsies, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
In this study, we investigated the association of recurrent genomic copy number
variants (CNVs) with thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections (TAAD). By using
SNP arrays to screen and comparative genomic hybridization microarrays to
validate, we identified 16p13.1 duplications in 8 out of 765 patients of European
descent with adult-onset TAAD compared with 4 of 4,569 controls matched for
ethnicity (P = 5.0 Ã 10â»âµ, OR = 12.2). The findings were replicated in an
independent cohort of 467 patients of European descent with TAAD (P = 0.005, OR =
14.7). Patients with 16p13.1 duplications were more likely to harbor a second
rare CNV (P = 0.012) and to present with aortic dissections (P = 0.010) than
patients without duplications. Duplications of 16p13.1 were identified in 2 of
130 patients with familial TAAD, but the duplications did not segregate with TAAD
in the families. MYH11, a gene known to predispose to TAAD, lies in the
duplicated region of 16p13.1, and increased MYH11 expression was found in aortic 
tissues from TAAD patients with 16p13.1 duplications compared with control
aortas. These data suggest chromosome 16p13.1 duplications confer a risk for TAAD
in addition to the established risk for neuropsychiatric disorders. It also
indicates that recurrent CNVs may predispose to disorders involving more than one
organ system, an observation critical to the understanding of the role of
recurrent CNVs in human disease and a finding that may be common to other
recurrent CNVs involving multiple genes.

PMCID: PMC3116911
PMID: 21698135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):863-85. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.002.

Multiple recurrent de novo CNVs, including duplications of the 7q11.23 Williams
syndrome region, are strongly associated with autism.

Sanders SJ(1), Ercan-Sencicek AG, Hus V, Luo R, Murtha MT, Moreno-De-Luca D, Chu 
SH, Moreau MP, Gupta AR, Thomson SA, Mason CE, Bilguvar K, Celestino-Soper PB,
Choi M, Crawford EL, Davis L, Wright NR, Dhodapkar RM, DiCola M, DiLullo NM,
Fernandez TV, Fielding-Singh V, Fishman DO, Frahm S, Garagaloyan R, Goh GS,
Kammela S, Klei L, Lowe JK, Lund SC, McGrew AD, Meyer KA, Moffat WJ, Murdoch JD, 
O'Roak BJ, Ober GT, Pottenger RS, Raubeson MJ, Song Y, Wang Q, Yaspan BL, Yu TW, 
Yurkiewicz IR, Beaudet AL, Cantor RM, Curland M, Grice DE, GÃ¼nel M, Lifton RP,
Mane SM, Martin DM, Shaw CA, Sheldon M, Tischfield JA, Walsh CA, Morrow EM,
Ledbetter DH, Fombonne E, Lord C, Martin CL, Brooks AI, Sutcliffe JS, Cook EH Jr,
Geschwind D, Roeder K, Devlin B, State MW.

Author information: 
(1)Program on Neurogenetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 230 South
Frontage Road, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011 Aug;12(8):429.
    Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):806-8.

We have undertaken a genome-wide analysis of rare copy-number variation (CNV) in 
1124 autism spectrum disorder (ASD) families, each comprised of a single proband,
unaffected parents, and, in most kindreds, an unaffected sibling. We find
significant association of ASD with de novo duplications of 7q11.23, where the
reciprocal deletion causes Williams-Beuren syndrome, characterized by a highly
social personality. We identify rare recurrent de novo CNVs at five additional
regions, including 16p13.2 (encompassing genes USP7 and C16orf72) and Cadherin
13, and implement a rigorous approach to evaluating the statistical significance 
of these observations. Overall, large de novo CNVs, particularly those
encompassing multiple genes, confer substantial risks (OR = 5.6; CI = 2.6-12.0, p
= 2.4 Ã 10(-7)). We estimate there are 130-234 ASD-related CNV regions in the
human genome and present compelling evidence, based on cumulative data, for
association of rare de novo events at 7q11.23, 15q11.2-13.1, 16p11.2, and
Neurexin 1.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3939065
PMID: 21658581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Curr Genomics. 2010 Dec;11(8):607-17. doi: 10.2174/138920210793360952.

Retinoic Acid Induced 1, RAI1: A Dosage Sensitive Gene Related to Neurobehavioral
Alterations Including Autistic Behavior.

Carmona-Mora P(1), Walz K.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Dr. John T. Macdonald
Foundation, Department of Human Genetics, Miller School of Medicine, University
of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.

Genomic structural changes, such as gene Copy Number Variations (CNVs) are
extremely abundant in the human genome. An enormous effort is currently ongoing
to recognize and catalogue human CNVs and their associations with abnormal
phenotypic outcomes. Recently, several reports related neuropsychiatric diseases 
(i.e. autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, mental retardation, behavioral
problems, epilepsy) with specific CNV. Moreover, for some conditions, both the
deletion and duplication of the same genomic segment are related to the
phenotype. Syndromes associated with CNVs (microdeletion and microduplication)
have long been known to display specific neurobehavioral traits. It is important 
to note that not every gene is susceptible to gene dosage changes and there are
only a few dosage sensitive genes. Smith-Magenis (SMS) and Potocki-Lupski (PTLS) 
syndromes are associated with a reciprocal microdeletion and microduplication
within chromosome 17p11.2. in humans. The dosage sensitive gene responsible for
most phenotypes in SMS has been identified: the Retinoic Acid Induced 1 (RAI1).
Studies on mouse models and humans suggest that RAI1 is likely the dosage
sensitive gene responsible for clinical features in PTLS. In addition, the human 
RAI1 gene has been implicated in several neurobehavioral traits as
spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA2), schizophrenia and non syndromic autism. In this
review we discuss the evidence of RAI1 as a dosage sensitive gene, its
relationship with different neurobehavioral traits, gene structure and mutations,
and what is known about its molecular and cellular function, as a first step in
the elucidation of the mechanisms that relate dosage sensitive genes with
abnormal neurobehavioral outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3078685
PMID: 21629438  [PubMed]


18. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 May 26;12:205. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-205.

A scan statistic to extract causal gene clusters from case-control genome-wide
rare CNV data.

Nishiyama T(1), Takahashi K, Tango T, Pinto D, Scherer SW, Takami S, Kishino H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Public Health, Wako, Saitama 351-0197, Japan.
nishiyama@minos.ocn.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: Several statistical tests have been developed for analyzing
genome-wide association data by incorporating gene pathway information in terms
of gene sets. Using these methods, hundreds of gene sets are typically tested,
and the tested gene sets often overlap. This overlapping greatly increases the
probability of generating false positives, and the results obtained are difficult
to interpret, particularly when many gene sets show statistical significance.
RESULTS: We propose a flexible statistical framework to circumvent these
problems. Inspired by spatial scan statistics for detecting clustering of disease
occurrence in the field of epidemiology, we developed a scan statistic to extract
disease-associated gene clusters from a whole gene pathway. Extracting one or a
few significant gene clusters from a global pathway limits the overall false
positive probability, which results in increased statistical power, and
facilitates the interpretation of test results. In the present study, we applied 
our method to genome-wide association data for rare copy-number variations, which
have been strongly implicated in common diseases. Application of our method to a 
simulated dataset demonstrated the high accuracy of this method in detecting
disease-associated gene clusters in a whole gene pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: The scan statistic approach proposed here shows a high level of
accuracy in detecting gene clusters in a whole gene pathway. This study has
provided a sound statistical framework for analyzing genome-wide rare CNV data by
incorporating topological information on the gene pathway.

PMCID: PMC3130692
PMID: 21612662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2011 May 4;6(5):e18612. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018612.

Identifying human disease genes through cross-species gene mapping of
evolutionary conserved processes.

Poot M(1), Badea A, Williams RW, Kas MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Understanding complex networks that modulate development in humans is
hampered by genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity within and between populations. 
Here we present a method that exploits natural variation in highly diverse mouse 
genetic reference panels in which genetic and environmental factors can be
tightly controlled. The aim of our study is to test a cross-species genetic
mapping strategy, which compares data of gene mapping in human patients with
functional data obtained by QTL mapping in recombinant inbred mouse strains in
order to prioritize human disease candidate genes.
METHODOLOGY: We exploit evolutionary conservation of developmental phenotypes to 
discover gene variants that influence brain development in humans. We studied
corpus callosum volume in a recombinant inbred mouse panel (C57BL/6JÃDBA/2J, BXD 
strains) using high-field strength MRI technology. We aligned mouse mapping
results for this neuro-anatomical phenotype with genetic data from patients with 
abnormal corpus callosum (ACC) development.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: From the 61 syndromes which involve an ACC, 51 human
candidate genes have been identified. Through interval mapping, we identified a
single significant QTL on mouse chromosome 7 for corpus callosum volume with a
QTL peak located between 25.5 and 26.7 Mb. Comparing the genes in this mouse QTL 
region with those associated with human syndromes (involving ACC) and those
covered by copy number variations (CNV) yielded a single overlap, namely HNRPU in
humans and Hnrpul1 in mice. Further analysis of corpus callosum volume in BXD
strains revealed that the corpus callosum was significantly larger in BXD mice
with a B genotype at the Hnrpul1 locus than in BXD mice with a D genotype at
Hnrpul1 (Fâ=â22.48, p<9.87*10(-5)).
CONCLUSION: This approach that exploits highly diverse mouse strains provides an 
efficient and effective translational bridge to study the etiology of human
developmental disorders, such as autism and schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3087714
PMID: 21572526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nervenarzt. 2011 May;82(5):553-62. doi: 10.1007/s00115-010-3241-z.

[Genetics and animal modeling of autism spectrum disorders. New developments].

[Article in German]

Klauck SM(1), Poustka L, Chiocchetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Genomanalyse, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120, Heidelberg. s.klauck@dkfz.de

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are pervasive developmental disorders with a
complex phenotype in respect to communication, verbal development, and social
behavior. Manifold molecular genetic analyses point towards a multifactorial
genetic predisposition. For the identification of central key mechanisms large
consortia have performed linkage analysis, genome-wide association, and copy
number variation (CNV) studies, which led to the characterization of risk factors
for ASD like CNV and single nucleotide polymorphisms but also single rare
mutations. The so far associated genomic regions and candidate genes impact
neuronal development especially the establishment of the synaptic cleft,
secretion of surface proteins, or dendritic translation. These findings point
towards deficits of translation-dependent cell-cell connectivity and synaptic
plasticity for ASD. Animal models are relevant to analyze the pathomechanisms of 
single genetic risk variants at the cellular, tissue-specific, and behavioral
levels.

PMID: 21472451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Mar 26;12:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-45.

Human PTCHD3 nulls: rare copy number and sequence variants suggest a
non-essential gene.

Ghahramani Seno MM(1), Kwan BY, Lee-Ng KK, Moessner R, Lionel AC, Marshall CR,
Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology,
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Copy number variations (CNVs) can contribute to variable degrees of
fitness and/or disease predisposition. Recent studies show that at least 1% of
any given genome is copy number variable when compared to the human reference
sequence assembly. Homozygous deletions (or CNV nulls) that are found in the
normal population are of particular interest because they may serve to define
non-essential genes in human biology.
RESULTS: In a genomic screen investigating CNV in Autism Spectrum Disorders
(ASDs) we detected a heterozygous deletion on chromosome 10p12.1, spanning the
Patched-domain containing 3 (PTCHD3) gene, at a frequency of ~1.4% (6/427). This 
finding seemed interesting, given recent discoveries on the role of another
Patched-domain containing gene (PTCHD1) in ASD. Screening of another 177 ASD
probands yielded two additional heterozygous deletions bringing the frequency to 
1.3% (8/604). The deletion was found at a frequency of ~0.73% (27/3,695) in
combined control population from North America and Northern Europe predominately 
of European ancestry. Screening of the human genome diversity panel (HGDP-CEPH)
covering worldwide populations yielded deletions in 7/1,043 unrelated individuals
and those detected were confined to individuals of European/Mediterranean/Middle 
Eastern ancestry. Breakpoint mapping yielded an identical 102,624 bp deletion in 
all cases and controls tested, suggesting a common ancestral event.
Interestingly, this CNV occurs at a break of synteny between humans and mouse.
Considering all data, however, no significant association of these rare PTCHD3
deletions with ASD was observed. Notwithstanding, our RNA expression studies
detected PTCHD3 in several tissues, and a novel shorter isoform for PTCHD3 was
characterized. Expression in transfected COS-7 cells showed PTCHD3 isoforms
colocalize with calnexin in the endoplasmic reticulum. The presence of a patched 
(Ptc) domain suggested a role for PTCHD3 in various biological processes mediated
through the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. However, further investigation
yielded one individual harboring a homozygous deletion (PTCHD3 null) without ASD 
or any other overt abnormal phenotype. Exon sequencing of PTCHD3 in other
individuals with deletions revealed compound point mutations also resulting in a 
null state.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggests that PTCHD3 may be a non-essential gene in some
humans and characterization of this novel CNV at 10p12.1 will facilitate
population and disease studies.

PMCID: PMC3072306
PMID: 21439084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Mar;156(2):115-24. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31142. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Copy number variation characteristics in subpopulations of patients with autism
spectrum disorders.

Bremer A(1), Giacobini M, Eriksson M, Gustavsson P, Nordin V, Fernell E, Gillberg
C, Nordgren A, UppstrÃ¶mer A, Anderlid BM, NordenskjÃ¶ld M, Schoumans J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. anna.bremer@ki.se

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a heterogeneous group of disorders with a
complex genetic etiology. We used high-resolution whole genome array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) to screen 223 ASD patients for gene
dose alterations associated with susceptibility for autism. Clinically
significant copy number variations (CNVs) were identified in 18 individuals (8%),
of which 9 cases (4%) had de novo aberrations. In addition, 20 individuals (9%)
were shown to have CNVs of unclear clinical relevance. Among these, 13 cases
carried rare but inherited CNVs that may increase the risk for developing ASDs,
while parental samples were unavailable in the remaining seven cases.
Classification of all patients into different phenotypic and inheritance pattern 
groups indicated the presence of different CNV patterns in different patient
groups. Clinically relevant CNVs were more common in syndromic cases compared to 
non-syndromic cases. Rare inherited CNVs were present in a higher proportion of
ASD cases having first- or second-degree relatives with an ASD-related
neuropsychiatric phenotype in comparison with cases without reported heredity
(Pâ=â0.0096). We conclude that rare CNVs, encompassing potential candidate
regions for ASDs, increase the susceptibility for the development of ASDs and
related neuropsychiatric disorders giving us further insight into the complex
genetics underlying ASDs.

Copyright Â© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21302340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Am J Psychiatry. 2011 Mar;168(3):302-16. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10060876.
Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Copy number variants in schizophrenia: confirmation of five previous findings and
new evidence for 3q29 microdeletions and VIPR2 duplications.

Levinson DF(1), Duan J, Oh S, Wang K, Sanders AR, Shi J, Zhang N, Mowry BJ,
Olincy A, Amin F, Cloninger CR, Silverman JM, Buccola NG, Byerley WF, Black DW,
Kendler KS, Freedman R, Dudbridge F, Pe'er I, Hakonarson H, Bergen SE, Fanous AH,
Holmans PA, Gejman PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Palo
Alto, CA 94304-5797, USA. dflev@stanford.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate previously reported associations of copy number variants
(CNVs) with schizophrenia and to identify additional associations, the authors
analyzed CNVs in the Molecular Genetics of Schizophrenia study (MGS) and
additional available data.
METHOD: After quality control, MGS data for 3,945 subjects with schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective disorder and 3,611 screened comparison subjects were available
for analysis of rare CNVs (<1% frequency). CNV detection thresholds were chosen
that maximized concordance in 151 duplicate assays. Pointwise and genewise
analyses were carried out, as well as analyses of previously reported regions.
Selected regions were visually inspected and confirmed with quantitative
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In analyses of MGS data combined with other available data sets, odds
ratios of 7.5 or greater were observed for previously reported deletions in
chromosomes 1q21.1, 15q13.3, and 22q11.21, duplications in 16p11.2, and
exon-disrupting deletions in NRXN1. The most consistently supported candidate
associations across data sets included a 1.6-Mb deletion in chromosome 3q29 (21
genes, TFRC to BDH1) that was previously described in a mild-moderate mental
retardation syndrome, exonic duplications in the gene for vasoactive intestinal
peptide receptor 2 (VIPR2), and exonic duplications in C16orf72. The case
subjects had a modestly higher genome-wide number of gene-containing deletions
(>100 kb and >1 Mb) but not duplications.
CONCLUSIONS: The data strongly confirm the association of schizophrenia with
1q21.1, 15q13.3, and 22q11.21 deletions, 16p11.2 duplications, and exonic NRXN1
deletions. These CNVs, as well as 3q29 deletions, are also associated with mental
retardation, autism spectrum disorders, and epilepsy. Additional candidate genes 
and regions, including VIPR2, were identified. Study of the mechanisms underlying
these associations should shed light on the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.

PMID: 21285140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Autism Res. 2011 Apr;4(2):89-97. doi: 10.1002/aur.173. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

A genotype resource for postmortem brain samples from the Autism Tissue Program.

Wintle RF(1), Lionel AC, Hu P, Ginsberg SD, Pinto D, Thiruvahindrapduram B, Wei
J, Marshall CR, Pickett J, Cook EH, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Erratum in
    Autism Res. 2011 Aug;4(4):314.

The Autism Tissue Program (ATP), a science program of Autism Speaks, provides
researchers with access to well-characterized postmortem brain tissues.
Researchers access these tissues through a peer-reviewed, project-based approval 
process, and obtain related clinical information from a secure, online
informatics portal. However, few of these samples have DNA banked from other
sources (such as a blood sample from the same individual), hindering
genotype-phenotype correlation and interpretation of gene expression data derived
from the banked brain tissue. Here, we describe an initiative to extract DNA from
Brodmann Area 19, and genotype these samples using both the Affymetrix
Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 and the Illumina Human1M-Duo DNA Analysis
BeadChip genome-wide microarray technologies. We additionally verify reported
gender, and infer ethnic background from the single nucleotide polymorphism data.
We have also used a rigorous, multiple algorithm approach to identify genomic
copy number variation (CNV) from these array data. Following an initial proof of 
principle study using two samples, 52 experimental samples, consisting of 27
subjects with confirmed or suspected autism and related disorders, 5 subjects
with cytogenetically visible duplications of 15q, 2 with epilepsy and 18
age-matched normal controls were processed, yielding high-quality genotype data
in all cases. The genotype and CNV data are provided via the ATP informatics
portal as a resource for the autism research community.

Copyright Â© 2011, International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMID: 21254448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2010 Nov;82(5 Pt 1):051914. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

Competitive hybridization models.

Cherepinsky V(1), Hashmi G, Mishra B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fairfield University,
Fairfield, Connecticut 06824, USA. vcherepinsky@fairfield.edu

Microarray technology, in its simplest form, allows one to gather abundance data 
for target DNA molecules, associated with genomes or gene-expressions, and relies
on hybridizing the target to many short probe oligonucleotides arrayed on a
surface. While for such multiplexed reactions conditions are optimized to make
the most of each individual probe-target interaction, subsequent analysis of
these experiments is based on the implicit assumption that a given experiment
yields the same result regardless of whether it was conducted in isolation or in 
parallel with many others. It has been discussed in the literature that this
assumption is frequently false, and its validity depends on the types of probes
and their interactions with each other. We present a detailed physical model of
hybridization as a means of understanding probe interactions in a multiplexed
reaction. Ultimately, the model can be derived from a system of ordinary
differential equations (ODE's) describing kinetic mass action with
conservation-of-mass equations completing the system. We examine pairwise probe
interactions in detail and present a model of "competition" between the probes
for the target--especially, when the target is effectively in short supply. These
effects are shown to be predictable from the affinity constants for each of the
four probe sequences involved, namely, the match and mismatch sequences for both 
probes. These affinity constants are calculated from the thermodynamic parameters
such as the free energy of hybridization, which are in turn computed according to
the nearest neighbor (NN) model for each probe and target sequence. Simulations
based on the competitive hybridization model explain the observed variability in 
the signal of a given probe when measured in parallel with different groupings of
other probes or individually. The results of the simulations can be used for
experiment design and pooling strategies, based on which probes have been shown
to have a strong effect on each other's signal in the in silico experiment. These
results are aimed at better design of multiplexed reactions on arrays used in
genotyping (e.g., HLA typing, SNP, or CNV detection, etc.) and mutation analysis 
(e.g., cystic fibrosis, cancer, autism, etc.).

PMID: 21230507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e48835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048835. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Structural, genetic, and functional signatures of disordered neuro-immunological 
development in autism spectrum disorder.

Saxena V(1), Ramdas S, Ochoa CR, Wallace D, Bhide P, Kohane I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
Massachusetts, United States of America. vishal@mit.edu

BACKGROUND: Numerous linkage studies have been performed in pedigrees of Autism
Spectrum Disorders, and these studies point to diverse loci and etiologies of
autism in different pedigrees. The underlying pattern may be identified by an
integrative approach, especially since ASD is a complex disorder manifested
through many loci.
METHOD: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) was studied through two different and
independent genome-scale measurement modalities. We analyzed the results of copy 
number variation in autism and triangulated these with linkage studies.
RESULTS: Consistently across both genome-scale measurements, the same two
molecular themes emerged: immune/chemokine pathways and developmental pathways.
CONCLUSION: Linkage studies in aggregate do indeed share a thematic consistency, 
one which structural analyses recapitulate with high significance. These results 
also show for the first time that genomic profiling of pathways using a
recombination distance metric can capture pathways that are consistent with those
obtained from copy number variations (CNV).

PMCID: PMC3514226
PMID: 23239965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Front Genet. 2012 Nov 19;3:250. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00250. eCollection 2012.

Role of Glyoxalase 1 (Glo1) and methylglyoxal (MG) in behavior: recent advances
and mechanistic insights.

Distler MG(1), Palmer AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Chicago, IL, USA.

Glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) is a ubiquitous cellular enzyme that participates in the
detoxification of methylglyoxal (MG), a cytotoxic byproduct of glycolysis that
induces protein modification (advanced glycation end-products, AGEs), oxidative
stress, and apoptosis. The concentration of MG is elevated under high-glucose
conditions, such as diabetes. As such, GLO1 and MG have been implicated in the
pathogenesis of diabetic complications. Recently, findings have linked GLO1 to
numerous behavioral phenotypes, including psychiatric diseases (anxiety,
depression, schizophrenia, and autism) and pain. This review highlights GLO1's
association with behavioral phenotypes, describes recent discoveries that have
elucidated the underlying mechanisms, and identifies opportunities for future
research.

PMCID: PMC3500958
PMID: 23181072  [PubMed]


3. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jan 4;587(1):54-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.047. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

Autistic-like behavioral phenotypes in a mouse model with copy number variation
of the CAPS2/CADPS2 gene.

Sadakata T(1), Shinoda Y, Oka M, Sekine Y, Furuichi T.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Scientific Research Leaders Development Unit, Gunma University,
Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. sadakata-1024@umin.ac.jp

CaÂ²âº-dependent activator protein for secretion 2 (CAPS2 or CADPS2) facilitates
secretion and trafficking of dense-core vesicles. Recent genome-wide association 
studies of autism have identified several microdeletions due to copy number
variation (CNV) in one of the chromosome 7q31.32 alleles on which the locus for
CAPS2 is located in autistic patients. To evaluate the biological significance of
reducing CAPS2 copy number, we analyzed CAPS2 heterozygous mice. Our present
findings suggest that adequate levels of CAPS2 protein are critical for normal
brain development and behavior, and that allelic changes due to CNV may
contribute to autistic symptoms in combination with deficits in other
autism-associated genes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Schizophr Res. 2013 Jan;143(1):55-9. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.10.010. Epub 2012
Nov 13.

Expression of autism spectrum and schizophrenia in patients with a 22q11.2
deletion.

Vorstman JA(1), Breetvelt EJ, Thode KI, Chow EW, Bassett AS.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Psychiatry, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.a.s.vorstman@umcutrecht.nl

BACKGROUND: Copy number variants (CNVs) associated with neuropsychiatric
disorders are increasingly being identified. While the initial reports were
relatively specific, i.e. implicating vulnerability for a particular
neuropsychiatric disorder, subsequent studies suggested that most of these CNVs
can increase the risk for more than one neuropsychiatric disorder. Possibly, the 
different neuropsychiatric phenotypes associated with a single genetic variant
are really distinct phenomena, indicating pleiotropy. Alternatively, seemingly
different disorders could represent the same phenotype observed at different
developmental stages or the same underlying pathogenesis with different
phenotypic expressions.
AIMS: To examine the relation between autism and schizophrenia in patients
sharing the same CNV.
METHOD: We interviewed parents of 78 adult patients with the 22q11.2 deletion
(22q11.2DS) to examine if autistic symptoms during childhood were associated with
psychosis in adulthood. We used Chi-square, T-tests and logistic regression while
entering cognitive level, gender and age as covariates.
RESULTS: The subgroup of 22q11.2DS patients with probable ASD during childhood
did not show an increased risk for psychosis in adulthood. The average SRS scores
were highly similar between those with and those without schizophrenia.
CONCLUSIONS: ASD and schizophrenia associated with 22q11.2DS should be regarded
as two unrelated, distinct phenotypic manifestations, consistent with true
neuropsychiatric pleiotropy. 22q11.2DS can serve as a model to examine the
mechanisms associated with neuropsychiatric pleiotropy associated with other
CNVs.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23153825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):816-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds476. Epub 2012 Nov
11.

A genome-wide study shows a limited contribution of rare copy number variants to 
Alzheimer's disease risk.

Chapman J(1), Rees E, Harold D, Ivanov D, Gerrish A, Sims R, Hollingworth P,
Stretton A; GERAD1 Consortium, Holmans P, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Williams J,
Kirov G.

Collaborators: Harold D, Sims R, Gerrish A, Chapman J, Moskvina V, Abraham R,
Hollingworth P, Hamshere M, Pahwa JS, Dowzell K, Williams A, Jones N, Thomas C,
Stretton A, Morgan A, Williams K, Thomas S, Lovestone S, Powell J, Proitsi P,
Lupton MK, Brayne C, Rubinsztein DC, Gill M, Lawlor B, Lynch A, Morgan K, Brown
K, Passmore P, Craig D, McGuinness B, Johnston JA, Todd S, Holmes C, Mann D,
Smith AD, Love S, Kehoe PG, Hardy J, Guerreiro R, Singleton A, Mead S, Fox N,
Rossor M, Collinge J, Maier W, Jessen F, Heun R, KÃ¶lsch H, SchÃ¼rmann B, Ramirez
A, van den Bussche H, Heuser I, Kornhuber J, Wiltfang J, Dichgans M, FrÃ¶lich L,
Hampel H, HÃ¼ll M, Rujescu D, Goate A, Kauwe JS, Cruchaga C, Nowotny P, Morris JC,
Mayo K, Livingston G, Bass NJ, Gurling H, McQuillin A, Gwilliam R, Deloukas P,
NÃ¶then MM, Holmans P, O'Donovan M, Owen MJ, Williams J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

We assessed the role of rare copy number variants (CNVs) in Alzheimer's disease
(AD) using intensity data from 3260 AD cases and 1290 age-matched controls from
the genome-wide association study (GWAS) conducted by the Genetic and
Environmental Risk for Alzheimer's disease Consortium (GERAD). We did not observe
a significant excess of rare CNVs in cases, although we did identify duplications
overlapping APP and CR1 which may be pathogenic. We looked for an excess of CNVs 
in loci which have been highlighted in previous AD CNV studies, but did not
replicate previous findings. Through pathway analyses, we observed suggestive
evidence for biological overlap between single nucleotide polymorphisms and CNVs 
in AD susceptibility. We also identified that our sample of elderly controls
harbours significantly fewer deletions >1 Mb than younger control sets in
previous CNV studies on schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (P = 8.9 Ã 10(-4) and 
0.024, respectively), raising the possibility that healthy elderly individuals
have a reduced rate of large deletions. Thus, in contrast to diseases such as
schizophrenia, autism and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, CNVs do not
appear to make a significant contribution to the development of AD.

PMCID: PMC3554198
PMID: 23148125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurodev Disord. 2012 May 30;4(1):15. doi: 10.1186/1866-1955-4-15.

Association testing of copy number variants in schizophrenia and autism spectrum 
disorders.

Crespi BJ(1), Crofts HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, V5A 1 S6,
Canada. crespi@sfu.ca.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia have been associated with
an overlapping set of copy number variant loci, but the nature and degree of
overlap in copy number variants (deletions compared to duplications) between
these two disorders remains unclear.
METHODS: We systematically evaluated three lines of evidence: (1) the statistical
bases for associations of autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia with a set 
of the primary CNVs thus far investigated, from previous studies; (2) data from
case series studies on the occurrence of these CNVs in autism spectrum disorders,
especially among children, and (3) data on the extent to which the CNVs were
associated with intellectual disability and developmental, speech, or language
delays. We also conducted new analyses of existing data on these CNVs in autism
by pooling data from seven case control studies.
RESULTS: Four of the CNVs considered, dup 1q21.1, dup 15q11-q13, del 16p11.2, and
dup 22q11.21, showed clear statistical evidence as autism risk factors, whereas
eight CNVs, del 1q21.1, del 3q29, del 15q11.2, del 15q13.3, dup 16p11.2, dup
16p13.1, del 17p12, and del 22q11.21, were strongly statistically supported as
risk factors for schizophrenia. Three of the CNVs, dup 1q21.1, dup 16p11.2, and
dup 16p13.1, exhibited statistical support as risk factors for both autism and
schizophrenia, although for each of these CNVs statistical significance was
nominal for tests involving one of the two disorders. For the CNVs that were
statistically associated with schizophrenia but were not statistically associated
with autism, a notable number of children with the CNVs have been diagnosed with 
autism or ASD; children with these CNVs also demonstrate a high incidence of
intellectual disability and developmental, speech, or language delays.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that although CNV loci notably overlap
between autism and schizophrenia, the degree of strongly statistically supported 
overlap in specific CNVs at these loci remains limited. These analyses also
suggest that relatively severe premorbidity to CNV-associated schizophrenia in
children may sometimes be diagnosed as autism spectrum disorder.

PMCID: PMC3436704
PMID: 22958593  [PubMed]


7. Neural Plast. 2012;2012:589524. doi: 10.1155/2012/589524. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Animal models of psychiatric disorders that reflect human copy number variation.

Nomura J(1), Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Integrative Bioscience, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

The development of genetic technologies has led to the identification of several 
copy number variations (CNVs) in the human genome. Genome rearrangements affect
dosage-sensitive gene expression in normal brain development. There is strong
evidence associating human psychiatric disorders, especially autism spectrum
disorders (ASDs) and schizophrenia to genetic risk factors and accumulated CNV
risk loci. Deletions in 1q21, 3q29, 15q13, 17p12, and 22q11, as well as
duplications in 16p11, 16p13, and 15q11-13 have been reported as recurrent CNVs
in ASD and/or schizophrenia. Chromosome engineering can be a useful technology to
reflect human diseases in animal models, especially CNV-based psychiatric
disorders. This system, based on the Cre/loxP strategy, uses large chromosome
rearrangement such as deletion, duplication, inversion, and translocation.
Although it is hard to reflect human pathophysiology in animal models, some
aspects of molecular pathways, brain anatomy, cognitive, and behavioral
phenotypes can be addressed. Some groups have created animal models of
psychiatric disorders, ASD, and schizophrenia, which are based on human CNV.
These mouse models display some brain anatomical and behavioral abnormalities,
providing insight into human neuropsychiatric disorders that will contribute to
novel drug screening for these devastating disorders.

PMCID: PMC3414062
PMID: 22900207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42422. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042422. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Haploinsufficiency of Cyfip1 produces fragile X-like phenotypes in mice.

Bozdagi O(1), Sakurai T, Dorr N, Pilorge M, Takahashi N, Buxbaum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Copy number variation (CNV) at the 15q11.2 region, which includes a
gene that codes for CYFIP1 (cytoplasmic FMR1 interacting protein 1), has been
implicated in autism, intellectual disability and additional neuropsychiatric
phenotypes. In the current study we studied the function of Cyfip1 in synaptic
physiology and behavior, using mice with a disruption of the Cyfip1 gene.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We observed that in Cyfip1 heterozygous mice
metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR)-dependent long-term depression (LTD)
induced by paired-pulse low frequency stimulation (PP-LFS) was significantly
increased in comparison to wildtype mice. In addition, mGluR-LTD was not affected
in the presence of protein synthesis inhibitor in the Cyfip1 heterozygous mice,
while the same treatment inhibited LTD in wildtype littermate controls.
mGluR-agonist (RS)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG)-induced LTD was also
significantly increased in hippocampal slices from Cyfip1 heterozygous mice and
again showed independence from protein synthesis only in the heterozygous
animals. Furthermore, we observed that the mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR)
inhibitor rapamycin was only effective at reducing mGluR-LTD in wildtype animals.
Behaviorally, Cyfip1 heterozygous mice showed enhanced extinction of inhibitory
avoidance. Application of both mGluR5 and mGluR1 antagonist to slices from Cyfip1
heterozygous mice reversed the increase in DHPG-induced LTD in these mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results demonstrate that haploinsufficiency of
Cyfip1 mimics key aspects of the phenotype of Fmr1 knockout mice and are
consistent with the hypothesis that these effects are mediated by interaction of 
Cyfip1 and Fmrp in regulating activity-dependent translation. The data provide
support for a model where CYFIP1 haploinsufficiency in patients results in
intermediate phenotypes increasing risk for neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC3416859
PMID: 22900020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Feb;21(2):182-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.144. Epub 2012 Jul 
25.

16p11.2-p12.2 duplication syndrome; a genomic condition differentiated from
euchromatic variation of 16p11.2.

Barber JC(1), Hall V, Maloney VK, Huang S, Roberts AM, Brady AF, Foulds N, Bewes 
B, Volleth M, Liehr T, Mehnert K, Bateman M, White H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, Hampshire, 
UK. john.barber@soton.ac.uk

Chromosome 16 contains multiple copy number variations (CNVs) that predispose to 
genomic disorders. Here, we differentiate pathogenic duplications of
16p11.2-p12.2 from microscopically similar euchromatic variants of 16p11.2.
Patient 1 was a girl of 18 with autism, moderate intellectual disability,
behavioural difficulties, dysmorphic features and a 7.71-Mb (megabase pair)
duplication (16:21â521â005-29â233â146). Patient 2 had a 7.81-Mb duplication
(16:21â382â561-29â191â527), speech delay and obsessional behaviour as a boy and, 
as an adult, short stature, macrocephaly and mild dysmorphism. The duplications
contain 65 coding genes of which Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) has the highest
likelihood of being haploinsufficient and, by implication, a triplosensitive
gene. An additional 1.11-Mb CNV of 10q11.21 in Patient 1 was a possible modifier 
containing the G-protein-regulated inducer of neurite growth 2 (GPRIN2) gene. In 
contrast, the euchromatic variants in Patients 3 and 4 were amplifications from a
945-kb region containing non-functional immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGHV), hect
domain pseudogene (HERC2P4) and TP53-inducible target gene 3 (TP53TG3) loci in
proximal 16p11.2 (16:31â953â353-32â898â635). Paralogous pyrosequencing gave a
total copy number of 3-8 in controls and 8 to >10 in Patients 3 and 4. The
16p11.2-p12.2 duplication syndrome is a recurrent genomic disorder with a
variable phenotype including developmental delay, dysmorphic features, mild to
severe intellectual disability, autism, obsessive or stereotyped behaviour, short
stature and anomalies of the hands and fingers. It is important to differentiate 
pathogenic 16p11.2-p12.2 duplications from harmless, microscopically similar
euchromatic variants of proximal 16p11.2, especially at prenatal diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3548261
PMID: 22828807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Prog Neurobiol. 2012 Oct;99(1):81-91. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.07.005. Epub 
2012 Jul 17.

Copy number variations in neurodevelopmental disorders.

Grayton HM(1), Fernandes C, Rujescu D, Collier DA.

Author information: 
(1)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
King's College, London SE5 8AF, UK.

Common neurodevelopmental disorders (including autism, speech and language delay,
schizophrenia, epilepsy and intellectual disability) have complex aetiology,
which is predominantly genomic, but also environmental in origin. They share a
paradox, in that high heritability is matched by lowered fecundity, placing them 
under negative genetic selection. This implicates variants of recent origin, such
as de novo mutations or common, very low-risk polymorphisms that escape negative 
selection. High or moderate risk variants have been discovered by chromosome
analysis, genome sequencing and copy number variant (CNV) detection, including a 
3Mb deletion causing 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (Velo-Cardio-Facial Syndrome) that
has penetrance of up to 50% for schizophrenia. More recently, rare, recurrent and
often de novo pathogenic CNVs, including deletions at NRXN1, 1q21.2, 15q11.2 and 
15q13.3, 16p11.2 and duplications at VIPR2 and 16p13.11, have also been
discovered. These have several unique features that differentiate them from
Mendelian disease mutations in that they have incomplete penetrance, with
moderate-to-high odds ratios for risk, and show diagnostic pleiotropy, increasing
risk across the neurodevelopmental disorder spectrum. Some are also syndromic,
with characteristic features such as facial dysmorphology, and other specific
risks such as aortic dissection or obesity, implying that they might be better
classified as distinct diagnoses. The discovery of pathogenic CNVs provide new
opportunities for translation leading to patent benefit, including improvements
in clinical genetic diagnosis and genetic counselling, the possibility of
clinician decision-making tools for risk prediction, and the identification of
drug targets and implementation of personalised medicine using stratification by 
genotype.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22813947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 15;72(8):651-4. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.06.014.
Epub 2012 Jul 15.

Analysis of copy number variations in brain DNA from patients with schizophrenia 
and other psychiatric disorders.

Ye T(1), Lipska BK, Tao R, Hyde TM, Wang L, Li C, Choi KH, Straub RE, Kleinman
JE, Weinberger DR.

Author information: 
(1)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins University Medical
Campus, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Clinical studies have identified several regions of the genome with
copy number variations (CNVs) associated with diverse neurodevelopmental
behavioral disorders.
METHODS: We analyzed 1 million (M) single nucleotide polymorphism genotype arrays
for evidence of previously reported recurrent CNVs and enriched genome-wide CNV
burden in DNA from 600 brains, including 441 individuals with various psychiatric
diagnoses. We explored gene expression in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in
selected cases with CNVs and in other subjects with Illumina BeadArrays (568
subjects in total) and additionally in 66-92 subjects with quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The CNVs in previously reported genomic regions were identified in 4 of 
193 patients with the diagnosis of schizophrenia (1q21.1, 11q25, 15q11.2, 22q11),
4 of 238 patients with mood disorders (11q25, 15q11.2, 22q11), and 1 of 10
patients with autism (2p16.3). No evidence of increased genome-wide CNV burden
was observed in cases with schizophrenia or mood disorders, although the study is
underpowered to observe rare events. Messenger RNA expression patterns suggested 
incomplete molecular penetrance of observed CNVs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm in brain DNA the presence of certain recurrent CNVs
in a small percentage of patients with psychiatric diagnoses.

Copyright Â© 2012 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3456994
PMID: 22795968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Sep;159B(6):710-7. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32074. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Identification of two inherited copy number variants in a male with autism
supports two-hit and compound heterozygosity models of autism.

Gau SS(1), Liao HM, Hong CC, Chien WH, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. gaushufe@ntu.edu.tw

Autism is a childhood-onset neurodevelopmental disorder with complex genetic
mechanism underlying its etiology. Recent studies revealed that a few single de
novo copy number variants of genomic DNA (copy number variants [CNVs]) are
pathogenic and causal in some sporadic cases, adding support to the hypothesis
that some sporadic autism might be caused by single rare mutation with large
clinical effect. In this study, we report the detection of two novel private CNVs
simultaneously in a male patient with autism. These two CNVs include a
microduplication of ~4.5 Mb at chromosome 4q12-13.1 that was transmitted from his
mother and a microdeletion of ~1.8 Mb at 5q32 that was transmitted from his
father. Several genes such as LPHN3, POU4F3, SH3RF2, and TCERG1 mapped to these
two regions have psychiatric implications. However, the parents had only mild
degree of attention deficit symptoms but did not demonstrate any obvious autistic
symptoms or psychopathology. Our findings indicate that each of these two CNVs
alone may not be pathogenic enough to cause clinical symptoms in their respective
carriers, and hence they can be transmitted within each individual family.
However, concomitant presence of these two CNVs might result in the clinical
phenotypes of the affected patient reported here. Thus, our report of this family
may represent an example to show that two hits of CNV and the presence of
compound heterozygosity might be important mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis
of autism.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22778016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Gene. 2012 Sep 1;505(2):201-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.06.051. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Disruption of Contactin 4 in two subjects with autism in Chinese population.

Guo H(1), Xun G, Peng Y, Xiang X, Xiong Z, Zhang L, He Y, Xu X, Liu Y, Lu L, Long
Z, Pan Q, Hu Z, Zhao J, Xia K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, 
China.

Autism is a heterogeneous childhood neurodevelopmental disorder that is
characterised by deficits in verbal communication, impaired social interactions, 
restricted interests and repetitive behaviours. Using an Illumina
HumanCNV370-Quad BeadChip, we identified two Han Chinese individuals with autism 
and large duplications (~1.6 Mb and ~2.4 Mb) disrupting the same CNTN4 gene.
CNTN4 encodes a protein that functions as a cell-adhesion molecule and may play
an essential role in the formation of axon connections in the developing nervous 
system. The disruption of this gene has been reported to be the cause of the 3p
deletion syndrome and also a possible susceptibility factor for autism spectrum
disorders (ASDs). Our results suggest that rare copy number variations (CNVs) in 
CNTN4 may also influence autism susceptibility in Asian populations.
Interestingly, a comparison of the clinical phenotypes between the two subjects
revealed that the subject with the 2.4 Mb CNV (involving several other genes)
presented with a more severe phenotype than the subject with the 1.6 Mb CNV
(disrupting only CNTN4 and CNTN6). This suggests that other genes in the nearby
region may contribute to the pathogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22750301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul 13;91(1):38-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.011. Epub
2012 Jun 21.

Genome-wide transcriptome profiling reveals the functional impact of rare de novo
and recurrent CNVs in autism spectrum disorders.

Luo R(1), Sanders SJ, Tian Y, Voineagu I, Huang N, Chu SH, Klei L, Cai C, Ou J,
Lowe JK, Hurles ME, Devlin B, State MW, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

Copy-number variants (CNVs) are a major contributor to the pathophysiology of
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), but the functional impact of CNVs remains
largely unexplored. Because brain tissue is not available from most samples, we
interrogated gene expression in lymphoblasts from 244 families with discordant
siblings in the Simons Simplex Collection in order to identify potentially
pathogenic variation. Our results reveal that the overall frequency of
significantly misexpressed genes (which we refer to here as outliers) identified 
in probands and unaffected siblings does not differ. However, in probands, but
not their unaffected siblings, the group of outlier genes is significantly
enriched in neural-related pathways, including neuropeptide signaling,
synaptogenesis, and cell adhesion. We demonstrate that outlier genes cluster
within the most pathogenic CNVs (rare de novo CNVs) and can be used for the
prioritization of rare CNVs of potentially unknown significance. Several
nonrecurrent CNVs with significant gene-expression alterations are identified
(these include deletions in chromosomal regions 3q27, 3p13, and 3p26 and
duplications at 2p15), suggesting that these are potential candidate ASD loci. In
addition, we identify distinct expression changes in 16p11.2 microdeletions,
16p11.2 microduplications, and 7q11.23 duplications, and we show that specific
genes within the 16p CNV interval correlate with differences in head
circumference, an ASD-relevant phenotype. This study provides evidence that
pathogenic structural variants have a functional impact via transcriptome
alterations in ASDs at a genome-wide level and demonstrates the utility of
integrating gene expression with mutation data for the prioritization of genes
disrupted by potentially pathogenic mutations.

Copyright Â© 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3397271
PMID: 22726847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Schizophr Res. 2012 Aug;139(1-3):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.05.015. Epub 
2012 Jun 7.

Identification and characterization of three inherited genomic copy number
variations associated with familial schizophrenia.

Liao HM(1), Chao YL, Huang AL, Cheng MC, Chen YJ, Lee KF, Fang JS, Hsu CH, Chen
CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Graduate Program of Biotechnology in Medicine, 
National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Schizophrenia is a complex mental disorder with high degree of genetic influence 
in its etiology. Several recent studies revealed that copy number variations
(CNVs) of genomic DNA contributed significantly to the genetic architecture of
sporadic schizophrenia. This study aimed to investigate whether CNVs also
contribute to the familial forms of schizophrenia. Using array-based comparative 
genomic hybridization technology, we searched for pathogenic CNV associated with 
schizophrenia in a sample of 60 index cases from multiplex schizophrenia
families. We detected three inherited CNVs that were associated with
schizophrenia in three families, including a microdeletion of ~4.4Mb at
chromosome 6q12-q13, a microduplication of ~1Mb at chromosome 18q12.3, and an
interstitial duplication of ~5Mb at chromosome 15q11.2-q13.1. Our data indicate
that CNVs contribute to the genetic underpinnings of the familial forms of
schizophrenia as well as of the sporadic form. As 15q11-13 duplication is a
well-known recurrent CNV associated with autism in the literature, the detection 
of the 15q11.2-q13.1 duplication in our schizophrenia patients provides
additional support to other studies reporting that schizophrenia is part of the
clinical spectrum of 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22682706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;29(3):266-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.03.004.

[Analysis of de novo copy number variations in a family affected with autism
spectrum disorders using high-resolution array-based comparative genomic
hybridization].

[Article in Chinese]

He WZ(1), Liu WQ, Zhong XQ, Chen XL, Li SY, Zhang HM, Li Q, Cui QL, Sun XF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Department of Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Third
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Key Laboratory for Major
Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine and Genetics, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510150, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze de novo copy number variations (CNVs) in a Chinese family
affected with autism spectrum disorders (ASD).
METHODS: Affymetrix Cytogenetics Whole Genome 2.7M Array assay was performed to
identify potential CNVs in four members from the family.
RESULTS: A total of 89 de novo CNV regions were identified in the autistic
siblings. The CNV regions in total have exceeded 1/1000 of the lengths of
chromosomes 5, 11 and 14. In addition, de novo CNV regions were also identified
at 3p26.1, 4q22.2, and 5p15.2, which encompassed 10 genes associated with nerve
development including GRM7, GRID2 and CTNND2.
CONCLUSION: A number of nerve development associated genes were at the de novo
CNV sites, which may provide new clues for genetic research of ASD.
High-resolution array-comparative genomic hybridization is an effective method
for detecting submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances.

PMID: 22678785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nature. 2012 May 16;485(7398):363-7. doi: 10.1038/nature11091.

KCTD13 is a major driver of mirrored neuroanatomical phenotypes of the 16p11.2
copy number variant.

Golzio C(1), Willer J, Talkowski ME, Oh EC, Taniguchi Y, Jacquemont S, Reymond A,
Sun M, Sawa A, Gusella JF, Kamiya A, Beckmann JS, Katsanis N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Disease Modeling and Department of Cell biology, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 May 17;485(7398):318-9.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are major contributors to genetic disorders. We have 
dissected a region of the 16p11.2 chromosome--which encompasses 29 genes--that
confers susceptibility to neurocognitive defects when deleted or duplicated.
Overexpression of each human transcript in zebrafish embryos identified KCTD13 as
the sole message capable of inducing the microcephaly phenotype associated with
the 16p11.2 duplication, whereas suppression of the same locus yielded the
macrocephalic phenotype associated with the 16p11.2 deletion, capturing the
mirror phenotypes of humans. Analyses of zebrafish and mouse embryos suggest that
microcephaly is caused by decreased proliferation of neuronal progenitors with
concomitant increase in apoptosis in the developing brain, whereas macrocephaly
arises by increased proliferation and no changes in apoptosis. A role for KCTD13 
dosage changes is consistent with autism in both a recently reported family with 
a reduced 16p11.2 deletion and a subject reported here with a complex 16p11.2
rearrangement involving de novo structural alteration of KCTD13. Our data suggest
that KCTD13 is a major driver for the neurodevelopmental phenotypes associated
with the 16p11.2 CNV, reinforce the idea that one or a small number of
transcripts within a CNV can underpin clinical phenotypes, and offer an efficient
route to identifying dosage-sensitive loci.

PMCID: PMC3366115
PMID: 22596160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dis Model Mech. 2012 Nov;5(6):834-51. doi: 10.1242/dmm.009944. Epub 2012 May 1.

Zebrafish homologs of genes within 16p11.2, a genomic region associated with
brain disorders, are active during brain development, and include two deletion
dosage sensor genes.

Blaker-Lee A(1), Gupta S, McCammon JM, De Rienzo G, Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
MA 02142, USA.

Deletion or duplication of one copy of the human 16p11.2 interval is tightly
associated with impaired brain function, including autism spectrum disorders
(ASDs), intellectual disability disorder (IDD) and other phenotypes, indicating
the importance of gene dosage in this copy number variant region (CNV). The core 
of this CNV includes 25 genes; however, the number of genes that contribute to
these phenotypes is not known. Furthermore, genes whose functional levels change 
with deletion or duplication (termed 'dosage sensors'), which can associate the
CNV with pathologies, have not been identified in this region. Using the
zebrafish as a tool, a set of 16p11.2 homologs was identified, primarily on
chromosomes 3 and 12. Use of 11 phenotypic assays, spanning the first 5 days of
development, demonstrated that this set of genes is highly active, such that 21
out of the 22 homologs tested showed loss-of-function phenotypes. Most genes in
this region were required for nervous system development - impacting brain
morphology, eye development, axonal density or organization, and motor response. 
In general, human genes were able to substitute for the fish homolog,
demonstrating orthology and suggesting conserved molecular pathways. In a screen 
for 16p11.2 genes whose function is sensitive to hemizygosity, the aldolase a
(aldoaa) and kinesin family member 22 (kif22) genes were identified as giving
clear phenotypes when RNA levels were reduced by â¼50%, suggesting that these
genes are deletion dosage sensors. This study leads to two major findings. The
first is that the 16p11.2 region comprises a highly active set of genes, which
could present a large genetic target and might explain why multiple brain
function, and other, phenotypes are associated with this interval. The second
major finding is that there are (at least) two genes with deletion dosage sensor 
properties among the 16p11.2 set, and these could link this CNV to brain
disorders such as ASD and IDD.

PMCID: PMC3484866
PMID: 22566537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Nov;20(11):1141-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.73. Epub 2012 May
2.

CNVs leading to fusion transcripts in individuals with autism spectrum disorder.

Holt R(1), Sykes NH, ConceiÃ§Ã£o IC, Cazier JB, Anney RJ, Oliveira G, Gallagher L, 
Vicente A, Monaco AP, Pagnamenta AT.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

There is strong evidence that rare copy number variants (CNVs) have a role in
susceptibility to autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Much research has focused on 
how CNVs mediate a phenotypic effect by altering gene expression levels. We
investigated an alternative mechanism whereby CNVs combine the 5' and 3' ends of 
two genes, creating a 'fusion gene'. Any resulting mRNA with an open reading
frame could potentially alter the phenotype via a gain-of-function mechanism. We 
examined 2382 and 3096 rare CNVs from 996 individuals with ASD and 1287 controls,
respectively, for potential to generate fusion transcripts. There was no
increased burden in individuals with ASD; 122/996 cases harbored at least one
rare CNV of this type, compared with 179/1287 controls (P=0.89). There was also
no difference in the overall frequency distribution between cases and controls.
We examined specific examples of such CNVs nominated by case-control analysis and
a candidate approach. Accordingly, a duplication involving REEP1-POLR1A (found in
3/996 cases and 0/1287 controls) and a single occurrence CNV involving
KIAA0319-TDP2 were tested. However, no fusion transcripts were detected by
RT-PCR. Analysis of additional samples based on cell line availability resulted
in validation of a MAPKAPK5-ACAD10 fusion transcript in two probands. However,
this variant was present in controls at a similar rate and is unlikely to
influence ASD susceptibility. In summary, although we find no evidence that
fusion-gene generating CNVs lead to ASD susceptibility, discovery of a
MAPKAPK5-ACAD10 transcript with an estimated frequency of ~1/200 suggests that
gain-of-function mechanisms should be considered in future CNVs studies.

PMCID: PMC3476715
PMID: 22549408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Aug 1;21(15):3513-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds164. Epub 2012 Apr 
27.

Evaluation of copy number variations reveals novel candidate genes in autism
spectrum disorder-associated pathways.

Griswold AJ(1), Ma D, Cukier HN, Nations LD, Schmidt MA, Chung RH, Jaworski JM,
Salyakina D, Konidari I, Whitehead PL, Wright HH, Abramson RK, Williams SM, Menon
R, Martin ER, Haines JL, Gilbert JR, Cuccaro ML, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are highly heritable, yet relatively few
associated genetic loci have been replicated. Copy number variations (CNVs) have 
been implicated in autism; however, the majority of loci contribute to <1% of the
disease population. Therefore, independent studies are important to refine
associated CNV regions and discover novel susceptibility genes. In this study, a 
genome-wide SNP array was utilized for CNV detection by two distinct algorithms
in a European ancestry case-control data set. We identify a significantly higher 
burden in the number and size of deletions, and disrupting more genes in ASD
cases. Moreover, 18 deletions larger than 1 Mb were detected exclusively in
cases, implicating novel regions at 2q22.1, 3p26.3, 4q12 and 14q23. Case-specific
CNVs provided further evidence for pathways previously implicated in ASDs,
revealing new candidate genes within the GABAergic signaling and neural
development pathways. These include DBI, an allosteric binder of GABA receptors, 
GABARAPL1, the GABA receptor-associated protein, and SLC6A11, a postsynaptic GABA
transporter. We also identified CNVs in COBL, deletions of which cause defects in
neuronal cytoskeleton morphogenesis in model vertebrates, and DNER, a
neuron-specific Notch ligand required for cerebellar development. Moreover, we
found evidence of genetic overlap between ASDs and other neurodevelopmental and
neuropsychiatric diseases. These genes include glutamate receptors (GRID1, GRIK2 
and GRIK4), synaptic regulators (NRXN3, SLC6A8 and SYN3), transcription factor
(ZNF804A) and RNA-binding protein FMR1. Taken together, these CNVs may be a few
of the missing pieces of ASD heritability and lead to discovering novel
etiological mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3392110
PMID: 22543975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2012 May 15;160C(2):118-29. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31327. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

The genetic variability and commonality of neurodevelopmental disease.

Coe BP(1), Girirajan S, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University 
of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.

Despite detailed clinical definition and refinement of neurodevelopmental
disorders and neuropsychiatric conditions, the underlying genetic etiology has
proved elusive. Recent genetic studies have revealed some common themes:
considerable locus heterogeneity, variable expressivity for the same mutation,
and a role for multiple disruptive events in the same individual affecting genes 
in common pathways. Recurrent copy number variation (CNV), in particular, has
emphasized the importance of either de novo or essentially private mutations
creating imbalances for multiple genes. CNVs have foreshadowed a model where the 
distinction between milder neuropsychiatric conditions from those of severe
developmental impairment may be a consequence of increased mutational burden
affecting more genes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4114147
PMID: 22499536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Nature. 2012 Apr 4;485(7397):246-50. doi: 10.1038/nature10989.

Sporadic autism exomes reveal a highly interconnected protein network of de novo 
mutations.

O'Roak BJ(1), Vives L, Girirajan S, Karakoc E, Krumm N, Coe BP, Levy R, Ko A, Lee
C, Smith JD, Turner EH, Stanaway IB, Vernot B, Malig M, Baker C, Reilly B, Akey
JM, Borenstein E, Rieder MJ, Nickerson DA, Bernier R, Shendure J, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012 Jun;13(6):359.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Jun;13(6):377.

It is well established that autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have a strong genetic
component; however, for at least 70% of cases, the underlying genetic cause is
unknown. Under the hypothesis that de novo mutations underlie a substantial
fraction of the risk for developing ASD in families with no previous history of
ASD or related phenotypes--so-called sporadic or simplex families--we sequenced
all coding regions of the genome (the exome) for parent-child trios exhibiting
sporadic ASD, including 189 new trios and 20 that were previously reported.
Additionally, we also sequenced the exomes of 50 unaffected siblings
corresponding to these new (n = 31) and previously reported trios (n = 19), for a
total of 677 individual exomes from 209 families. Here we show that de novo point
mutations are overwhelmingly paternal in origin (4:1 bias) and positively
correlated with paternal age, consistent with the modest increased risk for
children of older fathers to develop ASD. Moreover, 39% (49 of 126) of the most
severe or disruptive de novo mutations map to a highly interconnected
Î²-catenin/chromatin remodelling protein network ranked significantly for autism
candidate genes. In proband exomes, recurrent protein-altering mutations were
observed in two genes: CHD8 and NTNG1. Mutation screening of six candidate genes 
in 1,703 ASD probands identified additional de novo, protein-altering mutations
in GRIN2B, LAMC3 and SCN1A. Combined with copy number variant (CNV) data, these
results indicate extreme locus heterogeneity but also provide a target for future
discovery, diagnostics and therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3350576
PMID: 22495309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3083-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds124. Epub 2012 Apr
5.

Enriched rearing improves behavioral responses of an animal model for CNV-based
autistic-like traits.

Lacaria M(1), Spencer C, Gu W, Paylor R, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PTLS; MIM #610883), characterized by neurobehavioral
abnormalities, intellectual disability and congenital anomalies, is caused by a
3.7-Mb duplication in 17p11.2. Neurobehavioral studies determined that â¼70-90% of
PTLS subjects tested positive for autism or autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We
previously chromosomally engineered a mouse model for PTLS (Dp(11)17/+) with a
duplication of a 2-Mb genomic interval syntenic to the PTLS region and identified
consistent behavioral abnormalities in this mouse model. We now report extensive 
phenotyping with behavioral assays established to evaluate core and associated
autistic-like traits, including tests for social abnormalities, ultrasonic
vocalizations, perseverative and stereotypic behaviors, anxiety, learning and
memory deficits and motor defects. Alterations were identified in both core and
associated ASD-like traits. Rearing this animal model in an enriched environment 
mitigated some, and even rescued selected, neurobehavioral abnormalities,
suggesting a role for gene-environment interactions in the determination of copy 
number variation-mediated autism severity.

PMCID: PMC3384379
PMID: 22492990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Autism. 2012 Apr 2;3:2. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-3-2.

Evidence of novel fine-scale structural variation at autism spectrum disorder
candidate loci.

Hedges DJ(1), Hamilton-Nelson KL, Sacharow SJ, Nations L, Beecham GW, Kozhekbaeva
ZM, Butler BL, Cukier HN, Whitehead PL, Ma D, Jaworski JM, Nathanson L, Lee JM,
Hauser SL, Oksenberg JR, Cuccaro ML, Haines JL, Gilbert JR, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, 1501 NW 10 Ave, M-860, Miami, FL 33136, USA. dhedges@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) represent a group of
neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by a core set of social-communicative 
and behavioral impairments. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the major
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, acting primarily via the GABA receptors
(GABR). Multiple lines of evidence, including altered GABA and GABA receptor
expression in autistic patients, indicate that the GABAergic system may be
involved in the etiology of autism.
METHODS: As copy number variations (CNVs), particularly rare and de novo CNVs,
have now been implicated in ASD risk, we examined the GABA receptors and genes in
related pathways for structural variation that may be associated with autism. We 
further extended our candidate gene set to include 19 genes and regions that had 
either been directly implicated in the autism literature or were directly related
(via function or ancestry) to these primary candidates. For the high resolution
CNV screen we employed custom-designed 244 k comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH) arrays. Collectively, our probes spanned a total of 11 Mb of GABA-related
and additional candidate regions with a density of approximately one probe every 
200 nucleotides, allowing a theoretical resolution for detection of CNVs of
approximately 1 kb or greater on average. One hundred and sixty-eight autism
cases and 149 control individuals were screened for structural variants.
Prioritized CNV events were confirmed using quantitative PCR, and confirmed loci 
were evaluated on an additional set of 170 cases and 170 control individuals that
were not included in the original discovery set. Loci that remained interesting
were subsequently screened via quantitative PCR on an additional set of 755 cases
and 1,809 unaffected family members.
RESULTS: Results include rare deletions in autistic individuals at JAKMIP1,
NRXN1, Neuroligin4Y, OXTR, and ABAT. Common insertion/deletion polymorphisms were
detected at several loci, including GABBR2 and NRXN3. Overall, statistically
significant enrichment in affected vs. unaffected individuals was observed for
NRXN1 deletions.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide additional support for the role of rare
structural variation in ASD.

PMCID: PMC3352055
PMID: 22472195  [PubMed]


25. Cell. 2012 Mar 16;148(6):1223-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.02.039.

CNVs: harbingers of a rare variant revolution in psychiatric genetics.

Malhotra D(1), Sebat J.

Author information: 
(1)Beyster Center for Genomics of Psychiatric Diseases, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 1020103, USA.

The genetic bases of neuropsychiatric disorders are beginning to yield to
scientific inquiry. Genome-wide studies of copy number variation (CNV) have given
rise to a new understanding of disease etiology, bringing rare variants to the
forefront. A proportion of risk for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and autism
can be explained by rare mutations. Such alleles arise by de novo mutation in the
individual or in recent ancestry. Alleles can have specific effects on behavioral
and neuroanatomical traits; however, expressivity is variable, particularly for
neuropsychiatric phenotypes. Knowledge from CNV studies reflects the nature of
rare alleles in general and will serve as a guide as we move forward into a new
era of whole-genome sequencing.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3351385
PMID: 22424231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Clin Genet. 2013 Feb;83(2):145-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01860.x. Epub
2012 Apr 9.

Clinical application of 2.7M Cytogenetics array for CNV detection in subjects
with idiopathic autism and/or intellectual disability.

Qiao Y(1), Tyson C, Hrynchak M, Lopez-Rangel E, Hildebrand J, Martell S, Fawcett 
C, Kasmara L, Calli K, Harvard C, Liu X, Holden JJ, Lewis SM, Rajcan-Separovic E.

Author information: 
(1)BC Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Higher resolution whole-genome arrays facilitate the identification of smaller
copy number variations (CNVs) and their integral genes contributing to autism
and/or intellectual disability (ASD/ID). Our study describes the use of one of
the highest resolution arrays, the Affymetrix(Â®) Cytogenetics 2.7M array, coupled
with quantitative multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of short fluorescent 
fragments (QMPSF) for detection and validation of small CNVs. We studied 82
subjects with ASD and ID in total (30 in the validation and 52 in the application
cohort) and detected putatively pathogenic CNVs in 6/52 cases from the
application cohort. This included a 130-kb maternal duplication spanning exons
64-79 of the DMD gene which was found in a 3-year-old boy manifesting autism and 
mild neuromotor delays. Other pathogenic CNVs involved 4p14, 12q24.31, 14q32.31, 
15q13.2-13.3, and 17p13.3. We established the optimal experimental conditions
which, when applied to select small CNVs for QMPSF confirmation, reduced the
false positive rate from 60% to 25%. Our work suggests that selection of small
CNVs based on the function of integral genes, followed by review of array
experimental parameters resulting in highest confirmation rate using multiplex
PCR, may enhance the usefulness of higher resolution platforms for ASD and ID
gene discovery.

Â© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22369279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gene. 2012 Apr 1;496(2):88-96. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.020. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Integrative gene network analysis provides novel regulatory relationships,
genetic contributions and susceptible targets in autism spectrum disorders.

Lee TL(1), Raygada MJ, Rennert OM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical and Developmental Genomics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. leetl@mail.nih.gov

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of diseases exhibiting impairment in
social drive, communication/language skills and stereotyped behaviors. Though an 
increased number of candidate genes and molecular interactions have been
identified by various approaches, the pathogenesis remains elusive. Based on
clinical observations, data from accessible GWAS and expression datasets we
identified ASDs gene candidates. Integrative gene network and a novel CNV-centric
Node Network (CNN) analysis method highlighted ASDs-associated key elements and
biological processes. Functional analysis identified neurological functions
including synaptic cholinergic receptor (CHRNA) families, dopamine receptor
(DRD2), and correlations between social behavior and oxytocin related pathways.
CNN analysis of genome-wide genetic and expression data identified
inheritance-related clusters related to PTEN/TSC1/FMR1 and mTor/PI3K regulation. 
Integrative analysis identified potential regulators of networks, specifically
TNF and beta-estradiol, suggesting a potential central role in ASDs. Our data
provide information on potential disease mechanisms, and key regulators that may 
generate novel postulations, and diagnostic molecular biomarkers.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3303594
PMID: 22306264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Bioinformatics. 2012 Mar 1;28(5):724-5. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts032. Epub 
2012 Jan 18.

AnnTools: a comprehensive and versatile annotation toolkit for genomic variants.

Makarov V(1), O'Grady T, Cai G, Lihm J, Buxbaum JD, Yoon S.

Author information: 
(1)The Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Department of Psychiatry,
Levy Library, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.
vladimir.makarov@mssm.edu

AnnTools is a versatile bioinformatics application designed for comprehensive
annotation of a full spectrum of human genome variation: novel and known
single-nucleotide substitutions (SNP/SNV), short insertions/deletions (INDEL) and
structural variants/copy number variation (SV/CNV). The variants are interpreted 
by interrogating data compiled from 15 constantly updated sources. In addition to
detailed functional characterization of the coding variants, AnnTools searches
for overlaps with regulatory elements, disease/trait associated loci, known
segmental duplications and artifact prone regions, thereby offering an integrated
and comprehensive analysis of genomic data. The tool conveniently accepts
user-provided tracks for custom annotation and offers flexibility in input data
formats. The output is generated in the universal Variant Call Format. High
annotation speed makes AnnTools suitable for high-throughput sequencing
facilities, while a low-memory footprint and modest CPU requirements allow it to 
operate on a personal computer. The application is freely available for public
use; the package includes installation scripts and a set of helper
tools.AVAILABILITY: http://anntools.sourceforge.net/.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC3289923
PMID: 22257670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2012;12:345-60. doi: 10.1007/7854_2011_179.

Rare genomic deletions and duplications and their role in neurodevelopmental
disorders.

Glessner JT(1), Connolly JJ, Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.

Copy number variations (CNVs) are deletions and duplications of DNA sequences
that vary in length from a few base pairs to several million. While these
structural variations are often benign, they can disrupt vital biological
functions and result in disease. CNVs have been identified as causal in a number 
of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDs), including but not limited to, autism,
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and schizophrenia. Here, we
examine CNV research into these disorders, and discuss relevant methodological
considerations. By identifying specific rare deletions and duplications, we may
be better able to determine the etiology of neurodevelopmental disorders and
identify appropriate treatments.

PMID: 22241247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Gene. 2012 Mar 10;495(2):163-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.12.042. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

High resolution array in the clinical approach to chromosomal phenotypes.

Filges I, Suda L, Weber P, Datta AN, Fischer D, Dill P, Glanzmann R, Benzing J,
Hegi L, Wenzel F, Huber AR, Mori AC, Miny P, RÃ¶thlisberger B.

Array genomic hybridization (AGH) has recently been implemented as a diagnostic
tool for the detection of submicroscopic copy number variants (CNVs) in patients 
with developmental disorders. However, there is no consensus regarding the choice
of the platform, the minimal resolution needed and systematic interpretation of
CNVs. We report our experience in the clinical diagnostic use of high resolution 
AGH up to 100 kb on 131 patients with chromosomal phenotypes but previously
normal karyotype. We evaluated the usefulness in our clinics and laboratories by 
the detection rate of causal CNVs and CNVs of unknown clinical significance and
to what extent their interpretation would challenge the systematic use of
high-resolution arrays in clinical application. Prioritizing phenotype-genotype
correlation in our interpretation strategy to criteria previously described, we
identified 33 (25.2%) potentially pathogenic aberrations. 16 aberrations were
confirmed pathogenic (16.4% syndromic, 8.5% non-syndromic patients); 9 were new
and individual aberrations, 3 of them were pathogenic although inherited and one 
is as small as approx 200 kb. 13 of 16 further CNVs of unknown significance were 
classified likely benign, for 3 the significance remained unclear. High
resolution array allows the detection of up to 12.2% of pathogenic aberrations in
a diagnostic clinical setting. Although the majority of aberrations are larger,
the detection of small causal aberrations may be relevant for family counseling. 
The number of remaining unclear CNVs is limited. Careful phenotype-genotype
correlations of the individual CNVs and clinical features are challenging but
remain a hallmark for CNV interpretation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22240311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;838:115-35. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-507-7_5.

Detection and characterization of copy number variation in autism spectrum
disorder.

Marshall CR(1), Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

There now exist multiple lines of evidence pointing to a significant genetic
component underlying the aetiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). The
advent of methodologies for scanning the human genome at high resolution, coupled
with the recognition of copy number variation (CNV) as a prevalent source of
genomic variation, has led to new strategies in the identification of clinically 
relevant loci. Balanced genomic changes, such as translocations and inversions,
also contribute to ASD, but current studies have shown that screening with
microarrays has up to fivefold increase in diagnostic yield. Recent work by our
group and others has shown unbalanced genomic alterations that are likely
pathogenic in upwards of 10% of cases, highlighting an important role for CNVs in
the genetic aetiology of ASD. A trend in our empirical data has shifted focus for
discovery of candidate loci towards individually rare but highly penetrant CNVs
instead of looking for common variants of low penetrance. This strategy has
proven largely successful in identifying ASD-susceptibility candidate loci,
including gains and losses at 16p11.2, SHANK2, NRXN1, and PTCHD1. Another
emerging and intriguing trend is the identification of the same genes implicated 
by rare CNVs across neurodevelopmental disorders, including schizophrenia,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and intellectual disability. These
observations indicate that similar pathways may be involved in phenotypically
distinct outcomes. Although interrogation of the genome at high resolution has
led to these novel discoveries, it has also made cataloguing, characterization,
and clinical interpretation of the increasing amount of CNV data difficult.
Herein, we describe the history of genomic structural variation in ASD and how
CNV discovery has been used to pinpoint novel ASD-susceptibility loci. We also
discuss the overlap of CNVs across neurodevelopmental disorders and comment on
the current challenges of understanding the relationship between CNVs and
associated phenotypes in a clinical context.

PMID: 22228009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;838:29-75. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-507-7_2.

Microdeletion and microduplication syndromes.

Vissers LE(1), Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

During the past decade, widespread use of microarray-based technologies,
including oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping arrays have dramatically changed 
our perspective on genome-wide structural variation. Submicroscopic genomic
rearrangements or copy-number variation (CNV) have proven to be an important
factor responsible for primate evolution, phenotypic differences between
individuals and populations, and susceptibility to many diseases. The number of
diseases caused by chromosomal microdeletions and microduplications, also
referred to as genomic disorders, has been increasing at a rapid pace.
Microdeletions and microduplications are found in patients with a wide variety of
phenotypes, including Mendelian diseases as well as common complex traits, such
as developmental delay/intellectual disability, autism, schizophrenia, obesity,
and epilepsy. This chapter provides an overview of common microdeletion and
microduplication syndromes and their clinical phenotypes, and discusses the
genomic structures and molecular mechanisms of formation. In addition, an
explanation for how these genomic rearrangements convey abnormal phenotypes is
provided.

PMID: 22228006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Brain Nerve. 2012 Jan;64(1):65-70.

[Autism spectrum disorder and genes for synaptic proteins].

[Article in Japanese]

Shishido E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Physiology, National Institute for Physiological
Sciences, Japan.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by impaired social interaction
and communication, and restricted interests. It is generally accepted that ASD is
caused by abnormalities in the structure or functions of the brain. Recent
genome-wide analyses have identified copy number variations (CNVs) of neuronal
genes in the genomes of ASD patients. CNV is a commonly observed phenomenon in
human beings. During the first cell division of meiosis, irregular crossing over 
between homologous chromosomes results in loss or duplication of a segment. From 
2007 to 2010, several groups performed a large-scale virtual screening of CNVs in
ASD genomes. Genes affected by CNV, de novo CNVs, and rare CNVs were more
prevalent in ASD. The results highlighted the CNVs of many neuronal genes
associated with ASD. A fraction of these genes was previously identified in ASD
but some were newly identified in each study. The CNVs implicated in ASD include 
neuronal genes belonging to 4 classes. These genes encode (1) neural adhesion
molecules, including cadherins, neuroligin, and neurexin; (2) scaffold proteins
such as SHANK3; (3) protein kinases and other intracellular signaling molecules; 
and (4) proteins that regulate protein syntheses. In general, these proteins play
a role in synapse of glutamatergic neurons. The CNVs detected in the ASD patient 
genomes of imply a link between the synaptic proteins and pathological
characteristics of ASD. Altered protein dosage by the CNVs may alter the
functional quality of ASD patient's synapses, and may consequently affect their
development of language and communication skills. There are 2 types of ASD, one
is sporadic and, the other is familial. According to some reports, de novo CNVs
are more frequently observed in sporadic-type ASD. However, it is generally
understood that a combination of particular CNVs and other possible mutations
underlie the pathology of ASD regardless of ASD type. The major symptoms of ASD
are often curable with behavioral intervention during early childhood. An early
diagnosis, followed by early start of treatment is crucial for language
development and communication skills. Further and broader research on genomes
will eventually provide information on the biological characteristics of ASD, as 
well as on specific ASD genotypes, thus aiding in the establishment of optimal
treatment and medication to meet the biological conditions of each patient.

PMID: 22223503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Autism Open Access. 2012;Suppl 1:001.

Mouse Models of 22q11.2-Associated Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Hiroi N(1), Hiramoto T(2), Harper KM(3), Suzuki G(4), Boku S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA ; Department
of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA. 
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University, Ward 
Building Room 9-258, 303 E. Chicago Ave. Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama
359-8513, Japan.

Copy number variation (CNV) of human chromosome 22q11.2 is associated with an
elevated rate of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and represents one of syndromic
ASDs with rare genetic variants. However, the precise genetic basis of this
association remains unclear due to its relatively large hemizygous and
duplication region, including more than 30 genes. Previous studies using genetic 
mouse models suggested that although not all 22q11.2 genes contribute to ASD
symptomatology, more than one 22q11.2 genes have distinct phenotypic targets for 
ASD symptoms. Our data show that deficiency of the two 22q11.2 genesTbx1 and
Sept5 causes distinct phenotypic sets of ASD symptoms.

PMCID: PMC4118685
PMID: 25089229  [PubMed]


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):361-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1309324111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Ohnologs are overrepresented in pathogenic copy number mutations.

McLysaght A(1), Makino T, Grayton HM, Tropeano M, Mitchell KJ, Vassos E, Collier 
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Dublin
2, Ireland.

A number of rare copy number variants (CNVs), including both deletions and
duplications, have been associated with developmental disorders, including
schizophrenia, autism, intellectual disability, and epilepsy. Pathogenicity may
derive from dosage sensitivity of one or more genes contained within the CNV
locus. To understand pathophysiology, the specific disease-causing gene(s) within
each CNV need to be identified. In the present study, we test the hypothesis that
ohnologs (genes retained after ancestral whole-genome duplication events, which
are frequently dosage sensitive) are overrepresented in pathogenic CNVs. We
selected three sets of genes implicated in copy number pathogenicity: (i) genes
mapping within rare disease-associated CNVs, (ii) genes within de novo CNVs under
negative genetic selection, and (iii) genes identified by clinical array
comparative genome hybridization studies as potentially pathogenic. We compared
the proportion of ohnologs between these gene sets and control genes, mapping to 
CNVs not known to be disease associated. We found that ohnologs are significantly
overrepresented in genes mapping to pathogenic CNVs, irrespective of how CNVs
were identified, with over 90% containing an ohnolog, compared with control CNVs 
>100 kb, where only about 30% contained an ohnolog. In some CNVs, such as
del15p11.2 (CYFIP1) and dup/del16p13.11 (NDE1), the most plausible prior
candidate gene was also an ohnolog, as were the genes VIPR2 and NRXN1, each found
in short CNVs containing no other genes. Our results support the hypothesis that 
ohnologs represent critical dosage-sensitive elements of the genome, possibly
responsible for some of the deleterious phenotypes observed for pathogenic CNVs
and as such are readily identifiable candidate genes for further study.

PMCID: PMC3890797
PMID: 24368850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nature. 2014 Jan 16;505(7483):361-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12818. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

CNVs conferring risk of autism or schizophrenia affect cognition in controls.

Stefansson H(1), Meyer-Lindenberg A(2), Steinberg S(3), Magnusdottir B(4), Morgen
K(5), Arnarsdottir S(6), Bjornsdottir G(3), Walters GB(3), Jonsdottir GA(3),
Doyle OM(7), Tost H(5), Grimm O(5), Kristjansdottir S(3), Snorrason H(3),
Davidsdottir SR(4), Gudmundsson LJ(3), Jonsson GF(3), Stefansdottir B(3),
Helgadottir I(4), Haraldsson M(8), Jonsdottir B(9), Thygesen JH(10), Schwarz
AJ(11), Didriksen M(12), StensbÃ¸l TB(12), Brammer M(7), Kapur S(7), Halldorsson
JG(13), Hreidarsson S(14), Saemundsen E(15), Sigurdsson E(8), Stefansson K(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] deCODE genetics/Amgen, Sturlugata 8, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland [2]. (2)1]
Central Institute of Mental Health, University of Heidelberg Medical Faculty
Mannheim, 68159 Mannheim, Germany [2]. (3)deCODE genetics/Amgen, Sturlugata 8,
IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland. (4)Landspitali, Department of Psychiatry, National
University Hospital, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland. (5)Central Institute of Mental
Health, University of Heidelberg Medical Faculty Mannheim, 68159 Mannheim,
Germany. (6)1] deCODE genetics/Amgen, Sturlugata 8, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland [2]
Landspitali, Department of Psychiatry, National University Hospital, IS-101
ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland. (7)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College, 16 De Crespigny
Park, London SE5 8AF, UK. (8)1] Landspitali, Department of Psychiatry, National
University Hospital, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland [2] University of Iceland, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Iceland, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland. (9)RÃ¶ntgen Domus, 
EgilsgÃ¶tu 3, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland. (10)Mental Health Centre Sct. Hans,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry,
Boserupvej 2, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark. (11)Tailored Therapeutics, Lilly
Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly Corporate Center DC 1940,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA. (12)H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 9, DK-2500
Valby, Denmark. (13)University of Iceland, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Iceland, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland. (14)The State Diagnostic and Counselling
Centre, Digranesvegur 5, IS-200 KÃ³pavogur, Iceland. (15)1] University of Iceland,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, IS-101 ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland [2] The
State Diagnostic and Counselling Centre, Digranesvegur 5, IS-200 KÃ³pavogur,
Iceland.

In a small fraction of patients with schizophrenia or autism, alleles of
copy-number variants (CNVs) in their genomes are probably the strongest factors
contributing to the pathogenesis of the disease. These CNVs may provide an entry 
point for investigations into the mechanisms of brain function and dysfunction
alike. They are not fully penetrant and offer an opportunity to study their
effects separate from that of manifest disease. Here we show in an Icelandic
sample that a few of the CNVs clearly alter fecundity (measured as the number of 
children by age 45). Furthermore, we use various tests of cognitive function to
demonstrate that control subjects carrying the CNVs perform at a level that is
between that of schizophrenia patients and population controls. The CNVs do not
all affect the same cognitive domains, hence the cognitive deficits that drive or
accompany the pathogenesis vary from one CNV to another. Controls carrying the
chromosome 15q11.2 deletion between breakpoints 1 and 2 (15q11.2(BP1-BP2)
deletion) have a history of dyslexia and dyscalculia, even after adjusting for IQ
in the analysis, and the CNV only confers modest effects on other cognitive
traits. The 15q11.2(BP1-BP2) deletion affects brain structure in a pattern
consistent with both that observed during first-episode psychosis in
schizophrenia and that of structural correlates in dyslexia.

PMID: 24352232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):377-85. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36279. Epub 2013
Dec 5.

Changing interpretation of chromosomal microarray over time in a community cohort
with intellectual disability.

Palmer E(1), Speirs H, Taylor PJ, Mullan G, Turner G, Einfeld S, Tonge B, Mowat
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospital, NSW, Australia;
School of Women's and Children's Health, The University of NSW, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.

Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is the first-line diagnostic test for individuals
with intellectual disability, autism, or multiple congenital anomalies, with a
10-20% diagnostic yield. An ongoing challenge for the clinician and laboratory
scientist is the interpretation of variants of uncertain significance
(VOUS)-usually rare, unreported genetic variants. Laboratories differ in their
threshold for reporting VOUS, and clinical practice varies in how this
information is conveyed to the family and what follow-up is arranged. Workflows, 
websites, and databases are constantly being updated to aid the interpretation of
VOUS. There is a growing literature reporting new microdeletion and duplication
syndromes, susceptibility, and modifier copy number variants (CNVs). Diagnostic
methods are also evolving with new array platforms and genome builds. In 2010,
high-resolution arrays (Affymetrix 2.7âM Oligo and SNP, 50âkB resolution) were
performed on a community cohort of 67 individuals with intellectual disability of
unknown aetiology. Three hundred and one CNVs were detected and analyzed using
contemporary resources and a simple scoring system. Thirteen (19%) of the arrays 
were assessed as potentially pathogenic, 4 (6%) as benign and 50 (75%) of
uncertain clinical significance. The CNV data were re-analyzed in 2012 using the 
contemporary interpretative resources. There was a statistically significant
difference in the assessment of individual CNVs (Pâ<â0.0001). An additional eight
patients were reassessed as having a potentially pathogenic array (nâ=â21, 31%)
and several additional susceptibility or modifier CNVs were identified. This
study highlights the complexity involved in the interpretation of CMA and
uniquely demonstrates how, even on the same array platform, it can be subject to 
change over time.

Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24311194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Psychiatr Res. 2014 Feb;49:60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.10.022. Epub
2013 Nov 9.

Genome-wide copy number variation analysis in adult attention-deficit and
hyperactivity disorder.

Ramos-Quiroga JA(1), SÃ¡nchez-Mora C(2), Casas M(1), Garcia-MartÃ­nez I(3), Bosch
R(4), Nogueira M(5), Corrales M(5), Palomar G(5), Vidal R(5), Coll-TanÃ© M(3),
BayÃ©s M(6), Cormand B(7), RibasÃ©s M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain; Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona,
Spain; Department of Psychiatry and Legal Medicine, Universitat AutÃ²noma de
Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health
(CIBERSAM), Barcelona, Spain; Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research
Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Vall
d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Biomedical
Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain. (6)Centro Nacional de AnÃ¡lisis GenÃ³mico (CNAG), Parc CientÃ­fic de
Barcelona (PCB), Spain. (7)Departament de GenÃ¨tica, Facultat de Biologia,
Universitat de Barcelona, Spain; Centro de InvestigaciÃ³n BiomÃ©dica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain;
Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Spain.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain; Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona,
Spain; Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR),
Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: marta.ribases@gmail.com.

Attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common psychiatric
disorder with a worldwide prevalence of 5-6% in children and 4.4% in adults.
Recently, copy number variations (CNVs) have been implicated in different
neurodevelopmental disorders such as ADHD. Based on these previous reports that
focused on pediatric cohorts, we hypothesize that structural variants may also
contribute to adult ADHD and that such genomic variation may be enriched for CNVs
previously identified in children with ADHD. To address this issue, we performed 
for the first time a whole-genome CNV study on 400 adults with ADHD and 526
screened controls. In agreement with recent reports in children with ADHD or in
other psychiatric disorders, we identified a significant excess of insertions in 
ADHD patients compared to controls. The overall rate of CNVs >100Â kb was 1.33
times higher in ADHD subjects than in controls (pÂ =Â 2.4e-03), an observation
mainly driven by a higher proportion of small events (from 100Â kb to 500Â kb;
1.35-fold; pÂ =Â 1.3e-03). These differences remained significant when we
considered CNVs that overlap genes or when structural variants spanning candidate
genes for psychiatric disorders were evaluated, with duplications showing the
greatest difference (1.41-fold, pÂ =Â 0.024 and 2.85-fold, pÂ =Â 8.5e-03,
respectively). However, no significant enrichment was detected in our ADHD cohort
for childhood ADHD-associated CNVs, CNVs previously identified in at least one
ADHD patient or CNVs previously implicated in autism or schizophrenia. In
conclusion, our study provides tentative evidence for a higher rate of CNVs in
adults with ADHD compared to controls and contributes to the growing list of
structural variants potentially involved in the etiology of the disease.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Gene. 2014 Feb 1;535(1):70-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.020. Epub 2013 Nov 2.

Chromosomal microarray analysis of consecutive individuals with autism spectrum
disorders or learning disability presenting for genetic services.

Roberts JL(1), Hovanes K(2), Dasouki M(3), Manzardo AM(1), Butler MG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry, Behavioral Sciences and Pediatrics, The University 
of Kansas, Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA. (2)CombiMatrix Diagnostics,
Irvine, CA, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, The University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS, USA; King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (4)Departments of Psychiatry, Behavioral Sciences
and Pediatrics, The University of Kansas, Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.
Electronic address: mbutler4@kumc.edu.

Chromosomal microarray analysis is now commonly used in clinical practice to
identify copy number variants (CNVs) in the human genome. We report our
experience with the use of the 105 K and 180K oligonucleotide microarrays in 215 
consecutive patients referred with either autism or autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) or developmental delay/learning disability for genetic services at the
University of Kansas Medical Center during the past 4 years (2009-2012). Of the
215 patients [140 males and 75 females (male/female ratio=1.87); 65 with ASD and 
150 with learning disability], abnormal microarray results were seen in 45
individuals (21%) with a total of 49 CNVs. Of these findings, 32 represented a
known diagnostic CNV contributing to the clinical presentation and 17 represented
non-diagnostic CNVs (variants of unknown significance). Thirteen patients with
ASD had a total of 14 CNVs, 6 CNVs recognized as diagnostic and 8 as
non-diagnostic. The most common chromosome involved in the ASD group was
chromosome 15. For those with a learning disability, 32 patients had a total of
35 CNVs. Twenty-six of the 35 CNVs were classified as a known diagnostic CNV,
usually a deletion (n=20). Nine CNVs were classified as an unknown non-diagnostic
CNV, usually a duplication (n=8). For the learning disability subgroup,
chromosomes 2 and 22 were most involved. Thirteen out of 65 patients (20%) with
ASD had a CNV compared with 32 out of 150 patients (21%) with a learning
disability. The frequency of chromosomal microarray abnormalities compared by
subject group or gender was not statistically different. A higher percentage of
individuals with a learning disability had clinical findings of seizures,
dysmorphic features and microcephaly, but not statistically significant. While
both groups contained more males than females, a significantly higher percentage 
of males were present in the ASD group.

Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24188901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Bipolar Disord. 2013 Dec;15(8):893-8. doi: 10.1111/bdi.12125. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Reduced burden of very large and rare CNVs in bipolar affective disorder.

Grozeva D(1), Kirov G, Conrad DF, Barnes CP, Hurles M, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC,
Craddock N.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff.

OBJECTIVES: Large, rare chromosomal copy number variants (CNVs) have been shown
to increase the risk for schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric disorders
including autism, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, learning
difficulties, and epilepsy. Their role in bipolar disorder (BD) is less clear.
There are no reports of an increase in large, rare CNVs in BD in general, but
some have reported an increase in early-onset cases. We previously found that the
rate of such CNVs in individuals with BD was not increased, even in early-onset
cases. Our aim here was to examine the rate of large rare CNVs in BD in
comparison with a new large independent reference sample from the same country.
METHODS: We studied the CNVs in a case-control sample consisting of 1,650 BD
cases (reported previously) and 10,259 reference individuals without a known
psychiatric disorder who took part in the original Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium (WTCCC) study. The 10,259 reference individuals were affected with six
non-psychiatric disorders (coronary artery disease, types 1 and 2 diabetes,
hypertension, Crohn's disease, and rheumatoid arthritis). Affymetrix 500K array
genotyping data were used to call the CNVs.
RESULTS: The rate of CNVs > 100 kb was not statistically different between cases 
and controls. The rate of very large (defined as > 1 Mb) and rare (< 1%) CNVs was
significantly lower in patients with BD compared with the reference group. CNV
loci associated with schizophrenia were not enriched in BD and, in fact, cases of
BD had the lowest number of such CNVs compared with any of the WTCCC cohorts;
this finding held even for the early-onset BD cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Schizophrenia and BD differ with respect to CNV burden and
association with specific CNVs. Our findings support the hypothesis that BD is
etiologically distinct from schizophrenia with respect to large, rare CNVs and
the accompanying associated neurodevelopmental abnormalities.

Â© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24127788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(10):e1003823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003823. Epub 2013 Oct
3.

Both rare and de novo copy number variants are prevalent in agenesis of the
corpus callosum but not in cerebellar hypoplasia or polymicrogyria.

Sajan SA(1), Fernandez L, Nieh SE, Rider E, Bukshpun P, Wakahiro M, Christian SL,
RiviÃ¨re JB, Sullivan CT, Sudi J, Herriges MJ, Paciorkowski AR, Barkovich AJ,
Glessner JT, Millen KJ, Hakonarson H, Dobyns WB, Sherr EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC), cerebellar hypoplasia (CBLH), and
polymicrogyria (PMG) are severe congenital brain malformations with largely
undiscovered causes. We conducted a large-scale chromosomal copy number variation
(CNV) discovery effort in 255 ACC, 220 CBLH, and 147 PMG patients, and 2,349
controls. Compared to controls, significantly more ACC, but unexpectedly not CBLH
or PMG patients, had rare genic CNVs over one megabase (pâ=â1.48Ã10â»Â³; odds ratio
[OR]â=â3.19; 95% confidence interval [CI]â=â1.89-5.39). Rare genic CNVs were
those that impacted at least one gene in less than 1% of the combined population 
of patients and controls. Compared to controls, significantly more ACC but not
CBLH or PMG patients had rare CNVs impacting over 20 genes (pâ=â0.01; ORâ=â2.95; 
95% CIâ=â1.69-5.18). Independent qPCR confirmation showed that 9.4% of ACC
patients had de novo CNVs. These, in comparison to inherited CNVs, preferentially
overlapped de novo CNVs previously observed in patients with autism spectrum
disorders (pâ=â3.06Ã10â»â´; ORâ=â7.55; 95% CIâ=â2.40-23.72). Interestingly,
numerous reports have shown a reduced corpus callosum area in autistic patients, 
and diminished social and executive function in many ACC patients. We also
confirmed and refined previously known CNVs, including significantly narrowing
the 8p23.1-p11.1 duplication present in 2% of our current ACC cohort. We found
six novel CNVs, each in a single patient, that are likely deleterious: deletions 
of 1p31.3-p31.1, 1q31.2-q31.3, 5q23.1, and 15q11.2-q13.1; and duplications of
2q11.2-q13 and 11p14.3-p14.2. One ACC patient with microcephaly had a paternally 
inherited deletion of 16p13.11 that included NDE1. Exome sequencing identified a 
recessive maternally inherited nonsense mutation in the non-deleted allele of
NDE1, revealing the complexity of ACC genetics. This is the first systematic
study of CNVs in congenital brain malformations, and shows a much higher
prevalence of large gene-rich CNVs in ACC than in CBLH and PMG.

PMCID: PMC3789824
PMID: 24098143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Oct 3;93(4):607-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.09.001.

Identification of small exonic CNV from whole-exome sequence data and application
to autism spectrum disorder.

Poultney CS(1), Goldberg AP, Drapeau E, Kou Y, Harony-Nicolas H, Kajiwara Y, De
Rubeis S, Durand S, Stevens C, RehnstrÃ¶m K, Palotie A, Daly MJ, Ma'ayan A, Fromer
M, Buxbaum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Copy number variation (CNV) is an important determinant of human diversity and
plays important roles in susceptibility to disease. Most studies of CNV carried
out to date have made use of chromosome microarray and have had a lower size
limit for detection of about 30 kilobases (kb). With the emergence of whole-exome
sequencing studies, we asked whether such data could be used to reliably call
rare exonic CNV in the size range of 1-30 kilobases (kb), making use of the eXome
Hidden Markov Model (XHMM) program. By using both transmission information and
validation by molecular methods, we confirmed that small CNV encompassing as few 
as three exons can beÂ reliably called from whole-exome data. We applied this
approach to an autism case-control sample (n = 811, mean per-target read depth = 
161) and observed a significant increase in the burden of rare (MAF â¤1%) 1-30 kb 
CNV, 1-30 kb deletions, and 1-10 kb deletions in ASD. CNV in the 1-30 kb range
frequently hit just a single gene, and we were therefore able to carry out
enrichment and pathway analyses, where we observed enrichment for disruption of
genes in cytoskeletal and autophagy pathways in ASD. In summary, our results
showed that XHMM provided an effective means to assess small exonic CNV from
whole-exome data, indicated that rare 1-30Â kb exonic deletions could contribute
to risk in up to 7% of individuals with ASD, and implicated a candidate pathway
in developmental delay syndromes.

Copyright Â© 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791269
PMID: 24094742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2013;113(8):46-9.

[Genomic abnormalities in children with mental retardation and autism: the use of
comparative genomic hybridization in situ (HRCGH) and molecular karyotyping with 
DNA-microchips (array CGH)].

[Article in Russian]

Vorsanova SG(1), Iurov IIu, Kurinnaia OS, Voinova VIu, Iurov IuB.

Author information: 
(1)NauchnyÄ­ tsentr psikhicheskogo zdorov'ia RAMN, Moskva; MoskovskiÄ­ NII
pediatrii i detskoÄ­ khirurgii Minzdrava RF, Moskva; MoskovskiÄ­ gorodskoÄ­
psikhologo-pedagogicheskiÄ­ universitet, Moskva.

Genomic abnormalities occur with high frequency in children with mental
retardation and autistic spectrum disorders (ADS). Molecular karyotyping using
DNA microarrays is a new technology for diagnosis of genomic and chromosomal
abnormalities in autism implemented in the fields of biological psychiatry and
medical genetics. We carried out a comparative analysis of the frequency and
spectrum of genome abnormalities in children with mental retardation and autism
of unknown etiology using high-resolution comparative genomic methods for
hybridization (HRCGH) and molecular karyotyping (array CGH). In a study of 100
children with autism, learning difficulties and congenital malformations by
HRCGH, we identified genomic rearrangements in 46% of cases. Using array CGH we
examined 50 children with autism. In 44 cases out of 50 (88%), different genomic 
abnormalities and genomic variations (CNV - copy number variations) were
identified. Unbalanced genomic rearrangements, including deletions and
duplications, were found in 23 cases out of 44 (52%). These data suggest that
genomic abnormalities which are not detectable by common methods of chromosome
analysis are often discovered by molecular cytogenetic techniques in children
autism spectrum disorders. In addition, 54 children with idiopathic mental
retardation and congenital malformations (31 boys and 23 girls) without autism
spectrum disorders were examined using molecular karyotyping and microarray
containing an increased number of DNA samples for genomic loci of chromosome X.
Deletions and duplications affecting different regions of the chromosome X were
detected in 11 out of 54 children (20.4%).

PMID: 24077551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):378-85. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.07.022.
Epub 2013 Aug 28.

The penetrance of copy number variations for schizophrenia and developmental
delay.

Kirov G(1), Rees E(2), Walters JT(2), Escott-Price V(2), Georgieva L(2), Richards
AL(2), Chambert KD(3), Davies G(2), Legge SE(2), Moran JL(3), McCarroll SA(2),
O'Donovan MC(2), Owen MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics,
Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Electronic address: kirov@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics,
Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. (3)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, 
The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):344-5.

BACKGROUND: Several recurrent copy number variants (CNVs) have been shown to
increase the risk of developing schizophrenia (SCZ), developmental delay (DD),
autism spectrum disorders (ASD), and various congenital malformations (CM). Their
penetrance for SCZ has been estimated to be modest. However, comparisons between 
their penetrance for SCZ or DD/ASD/CM, or estimates of the total penetrance for
any of these disorders have not yet been made.
METHODS: We use data from the largest available studies on SCZ and DD/ASD/CM,
including a new sample of 6882 cases and 6316 controls, to estimate the
frequencies of 70 implicated CNVs in carriers with these disorders, healthy
control subjects, and the general population. On the basis of these frequencies, 
we estimate their penetrance. We also estimate the strength of the selection
pressure against CNVs and correlate this against their overall penetrance.
RESULTS: The rates of nearly all CNVs are higher in DD/ASD/CM compared with SCZ. 
The penetrance of CNVs is at least several times higher for the development of a 
disorder from the group of DD/ASD/CM. The overall penetrance of SCZ-associated
CNVs for developing any disorder is high, ranging between 10.6% and 100%.
CONCLUSIONS: CNVs associated with SCZ have high pathogenicity. The majority of
the increased risk conferred by CNVs is toward the development of an
earlier-onset disorder, such as DD/ASD/CM, rather than SCZ. The penetrance of
CNVs correlates strongly with their selection coefficients. The improved
estimates of penetrance will provide crucial information for genetic counselling.

Copyright Â© 2014 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4229045
PMID: 23992924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 26;8(8):e72381. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072381. eCollection
2013.

Genome-wide copy number variation in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in
the Turkish population: deletion of EPHA3 is a possible protective factor.

Uyan Ã(1), ÃmÃ¼r Ã, AÄÄ±m ZS, ÃzoÄuz A, Li H, Parman Y, Deymeer F, Oflazer P, KoÃ§
F, Tan E, ÃzÃ§elik H, BaÅak AN.

Author information: 
(1)Suna and Ä°nan KÄ±raÃ§ Foundation Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory,
Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey.

The genome-wide presence of copy number variations (CNVs), which was shown to
affect the expression and function of genes, has been recently suggested to
confer risk for various human disorders, including Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
(ALS). We have performed a genome-wide CNV analysis using PennCNV tool and 733K
GWAS data of 117 Turkish ALS patients and 109 matched healthy controls.
Case-control association analyses have implicated the presence of both common
(>5%) and rare (<5%) CNVs in the Turkish population. In the framework of this
study, we identified several common and rare loci that may have an impact on ALS 
pathogenesis. None of the CNVs associated has been implicated in ALS before, but 
some have been reported in different types of cancers and autism. The most
significant associations were shown for 41 kb and 15 kb intergenic heterozygous
deletions (Chr11: 50,545,009-50,586,426 and Chr19: 20,860,930-20,875,787) both
contributing to increased risk for ALS. CNVs in coding regions of the MAP4K3,
HLA-B, EPHA3 and DPYD genes were detected however, after validation by Log R
Ratio (LRR) values and TaqMan CNV genotyping, only EPHA3 deletion remained as a
potential protective factor for ALS (pâ=â0.0065024). Based on the knowledge that 
EPHA4 has been previously shown to rescue SOD1 transgenic mice from ALS phenotype
and prolongs survival, EPHA3 may be a promising candidate for therepuetic
interventions.

PMCID: PMC3753249
PMID: 23991104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Nov;18(11):1178-84. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.98. Epub 2013 Aug
13.

Detecting large copy number variants using exome genotyping arrays in a large
Swedish schizophrenia sample.

Szatkiewicz JP(1), Neale BM, O'Dushlaine C, Fromer M, Goldstein JI, Moran JL,
Chambert K, KÃ¤hler A, Magnusson PK, Hultman CM, Sklar P, Purcell S, McCarroll SA,
Sullivan PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Although copy number variants (CNVs) are important in genomic medicine, CNVs have
not been systematically assessed for many complex traits. Several large rare CNVs
increase risk for schizophrenia (SCZ) and autism and often demonstrate
pleiotropic effects; however, their frequencies in the general population and
other complex traits are unknown. Genotyping large numbers of samples is
essential for progress. Large cohorts from many different diseases are being
genotyped using exome-focused arrays designed to detect uncommon or rare
protein-altering sequence variation. Although these arrays were not designed for 
CNV detection, the hybridization intensity data generated in each experiment
could, in principle, be used for gene-focused CNV analysis. Our goal was to
evaluate the extent to which CNVs can be detected using data from one particular 
exome array (the Illumina Human Exome Bead Chip). We genotyped 9100 Swedish
subjects (3962 cases with SCZ and 5138 controls) using both standard genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) and exome arrays. In comparison with CNVs detected using
GWAS arrays, we observed high sensitivity and specificity for detecting genic
CNVs î¶400âkb including known pathogenic CNVs along with replicating the
literature finding that cases with SCZ had greater enrichment for genic CNVs. Our
data confirm the association of SCZ with 16p11.2 duplications and 22q11.2
deletions, and suggest a novel association with deletions at 11q12.2. Our results
suggest the utility of exome-focused arrays in surveying large genic CNVs in very
large samples; and thereby open the door for new opportunities such as conducting
well-powered CNV assessment and comparisons between different diseases. The use
of a single platform also minimizes potential confounding factors that could
impact accurate detection.

PMCID: PMC3966073
PMID: 23938935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Nov;18(11):1153-65. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.92. Epub 2013 Aug
6.

Copy number variation at 22q11.2: from rare variants to common mechanisms of
developmental neuropsychiatric disorders.

Hiroi N(1), Takahashi T, Hishimoto A, Izumi T, Boku S, Hiramoto T.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA [2] Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA [3] Department of Genetics,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

Recently discovered genome-wide rare copy number variants (CNVs) have
unprecedented levels of statistical association with many developmental
neuropsychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders,
intellectual disability and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. However, as
CNVs often include multiple genes, causal genes responsible for CNV-associated
diagnoses and traits are still poorly understood. Mouse models of CNVs are in use
to delve into the precise mechanisms through which CNVs contribute to disorders
and associated traits. Based on human and mouse model studies on rare CNVs within
human chromosome 22q11.2, we propose that alterations of a distinct set of
multiple, noncontiguous genes encoded in this chromosomal region, in concert with
modulatory impacts of genetic background and environmental factors, variably
shift the probabilities of phenotypes along a predetermined developmental
trajectory. This model can be further extended to the study of other CNVs and may
serve as a guide to help characterize the impact of genes in developmental
neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC3852900
PMID: 23917946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Am J Psychiatry. 2013 Sep;170(9):968-76. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.12121558.

New ethical issues for genetic counseling in common mental disorders.

Gershon ES, Alliey-Rodriguez N.

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry. 2014 May;171(5):584-5.

OBJECTIVE: Recent genetic findings of high-impact genetic variants in bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) must lead to profound
changes in genetic and family counseling. The authors present risk calculations, 
discuss the ethical implications of these findings, and outline the changes now
required in the risk counseling process.
METHOD: The authors use data from recent mega-analyses and reviews of common and 
rare risk variants in bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and ASD to calculate risks
of illness based on genetic marker tests. They then consider new ethical issues
in mental disorders presented by these risks, including within-family conflicts
over genetic testing; effects of genetic discoveries on stigma, abortion,
preimplantation procedures, and population screening for susceptibility; and
genetic tests as a factor in marital choice.
RESULTS: New structural mutations (de novo copy number variants [CNVs], which are
chromosomal microdeletions and micro-duplications) are present in 4%27% of
patients with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or ASD and can occur almost
anywhere in the genome. For a person with a de novo CNV, the absolute risk of
bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or ASD is 14%, much higher than the population
risk. Rare CNVs have also been identified that are generally not new mutations
but constitute very high-effect risk factors, ranging up to 82%.
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial minority of patients with bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia, and ASD have high-impact detectable genetic events. This greatly
changes psychiatric genetic counseling for these patients and families. A
psychotherapeutic approach may be needed as a routine part of risk counseling,
particularly for resolution of ethical issues and for within-family stigma and
conflicts over genetic test results.

PMID: 23897273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jul 24;14:499. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-499.

Identification of candidate intergenic risk loci in autism spectrum disorder.

Walker S(1), Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Centre for Applied Genomics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Copy number variations (CNVs) and DNA sequence alterations affecting 
specific neuronal genes are established risk factors for Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD). In what is largely considered a genetic condition, so far, these mutations
account for ~20% of individuals having an ASD diagnosis. However, non-coding
genomic sequence also contains functional elements introducing additional disease
risk loci for investigation.
RESULTS: We have performed genome-wide analyses and identified rare inherited
CNVs affecting non-genic intervals in 41 of 1491 (3%) of ASD cases examined.
Examples of such intergenic CNV regions include 16q21 and 2p16.3 near known ASD
risk genes CDH8 and NRXN1 respectively, as well as novel loci contiguous with
ZHX2, MOCS1, LRRC4C, SEMA3C, and other genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Rare variants in intergenic regions may implicate new risk loci and 
genes in ASD and also present useful data for comparison with coming whole genome
sequence datasets.

PMCID: PMC3734099
PMID: 23879678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):371-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.05.040.
Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Reciprocal duplication of the Williams-Beuren syndrome deletion on chromosome
7q11.23 is associated with schizophrenia.

Mulle JG(1), Pulver AE(2), McGrath JA(3), Wolyniec PS(3), Dodd AF(4), Cutler
DJ(5), Sebat J(6), Malhotra D(7), Nestadt G(3), Conrad DF(8), Hurles M(8), Barnes
CP(9), Ikeda M(10), Iwata N(10), Levinson DF(11), Gejman PV(12), Sanders AR(12), 
Duan J(12), Mitchell AA(13), Peter I(14), Sklar P(15), O'Dushlaine CT(16),
Grozeva D(17), O'Donovan MC(17), Owen MJ(17), Hultman CM(18), KÃ¤hler AK(19),
Sullivan PF(20); Molecular Genetics of Schizophrenia Consortium, Kirov G(17),
Warren ST(21).

Collaborators: Levinson DF, Duan J, Oh S, Wang K, Sanders AR, Shi J, Zhang N,
Mowry BJ, Olincy A, Amin F, Cloninger CR, Silverman JM, Buccola NG, Byerley WF,
Black DW, Kendler KS, Freedman R, Dudbridge F, Pe'er I, Hakonarson H, Bergen SE, 
Fanous AH, Holmans PA, Gejman PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University;
Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia. Electronic address: jmulle@emory.edu. (2)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine; Department of
Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine. (4)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University. (5)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia. (6)Beyster Center for Genomics of
Psychiatric Diseases; Department of PsychiatryUniversity of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California; Department of Cellular Molecular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California; Institute
for Genomic Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California. 
(7)Beyster Center for Genomics of Psychiatric Diseases; Department of
PsychiatryUniversity of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California. (8)The
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge. (9)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College
London, London, United Kingdom. (10)Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Toyake, Aichi, Japan. (11)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Stanford University, Stanford, California. (12)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(13)Department of Forensic Biology, Office of Chief Medical Examiner of the City 
of New York. (14)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, New York. (15)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics 
Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; Division of Psychiatric Genomics, Department of
Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York. (16)Psychiatric
and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston;
Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (17)Department
of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(18)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. (19)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Departments of Genetics and Psychiatry,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Division of Mental
Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (20)Departments of 
Genetics and Psychiatry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina. (21)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia; Departments of Biochemistry and Pediatrics, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.

BACKGROUND: Several copy number variants (CNVs) have been implicated as
susceptibility factors for schizophrenia (SZ). Some of these same CNVs also
increase risk for autism spectrum disorders, suggesting an etiologic overlap
between these conditions. Recently, de novo duplications of a region on
chromosome 7q11.23 were associated with autism spectrum disorders. The reciprocal
deletion of this region causes Williams-Beuren syndrome.
METHODS: We assayed an Ashkenazi Jewish cohort of 554 SZ cases and 1014 controls 
for genome-wide CNV. An excess of large rare and de novo CNVs were observed,
including a 1.4 Mb duplication on chromosome 7q11.23 identified in two unrelated 
patients. To test whether this 7q11.23 duplication is also associated with SZ, we
obtained data for 14,387 SZ cases and 28,139 controls from seven additional
studies with high-resolution genome-wide CNV detection. We performed a
meta-analysis, correcting for study population of origin, to assess whether the
duplication is associated with SZ.
RESULTS: We found duplications at 7q11.23 in 11 of 14,387 SZ cases with only 1 in
28,139 control subjects (unadjusted odds ratio 21.52, 95% confidence interval:
3.13-922.6, p value 5.5 Ã 10(-5); adjusted odds ratio 10.8, 95% confidence
interval: 1.46-79.62, p value .007). Of three SZ duplication carriers with
detailed retrospective data, all showed social anxiety and language delay
premorbid to SZ onset, consistent with both human studies and animal models of
the 7q11.23 duplication.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a new CNV associated with SZ. Reciprocal
duplication of the Williams-Beuren syndrome deletion at chromosome 7q11.23
confers an approximately tenfold increase in risk for SZ.

Copyright Â© 2014 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3838485
PMID: 23871472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e66707. Print 2013.

Prioritization of Copy Number Variation Loci Associated with Autism from AutDB-An
Integrative Multi-Study Genetic Database.

Menashe I(1), Larsen EC, Banerjee-Basu S.

Author information: 
(1)MindSpec, McLean, Virginia, United States of America ; Department of Public
Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev,
Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are thought to play an important role in the
predisposition to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, their relatively low
frequency and widespread genomic distribution complicates their accurate
characterization and utilization for clinical genetics purposes. Here we present 
a comprehensive analysis of multi-study, genome-wide CNV data from AutDB
(http://mindspec.org/autdb.html), a genetic database that accommodates detailed
annotations of published scientific reports of CNVs identified in ASD
individuals. Overall, we evaluated 4,926 CNVs in 2,373 ASD subjects from 48
scientific reports, encompassing â¼2.12Ã10(9) bp of genomic data. Remarkable
variation was seen in CNV size, with duplications being significantly larger than
deletions, (P â=â 3Ã10(-105); Wilcoxon rank sum test). Examination of the CNV
burden across the genome revealed 11 loci with a significant excess of CNVs among
ASD subjects (P<7Ã10(-7)). Altogether, these loci covered 15,610 kb of the genome
and contained 166 genes. Remarkable variation was seen both in locus size (20 -
4950 kb), and gene content, with seven multigenic (â¥3 genes) and four monogenic
loci. CNV data from control populations was used to further refine the boundaries
of these ASD susceptibility loci. Interestingly, our analysis indicates that
15q11.2-13.3, a genomic region prone to chromosomal rearrangements of various
sizes, contains three distinct ASD susceptibility CNV loci that vary in their
genomic boundaries, CNV types, inheritance patterns, and overlap with CNVs from
control populations. In summary, our analysis of AutDB CNV data provides valuable
insights into the genomic characteristics of ASD susceptibility CNV loci and
could therefore be utilized in various clinical settings and facilitate future
genetic research of this disorder.

PMCID: PMC3688962
PMID: 23825557  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. J Clin Bioinforma. 2013 Jun 11;3(1):12. doi: 10.1186/2043-9113-3-12.

Multiple samples aCGH analysis for rare CNVs detection.

Sykulski M(1), Gambin T, Bartnik M, DerwiÅska K, WiÅniowiecka-Kowalnik B,
Stankiewicz P, Gambin A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
aniag@mimuw.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: DNA copy number variations (CNV) constitute an important source of
genetic variability. The standard method used for CNV detection is array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).
RESULTS: We propose a novel multiple sample aCGH analysis methodology aiming in
rare CNVs detection. In contrast to the majority of previous approaches, which
deal with cancer datasets, we focus on constitutional genomic abnormalities
identified in a diverse spectrum of diseases in human. Our method is tested on
exon targeted aCGH array of 366 patients affected with developmental
delay/intellectual disability, epilepsy, or autism. The proposed algorithms can
be applied as a post-processing filtering to any given segmentation method.
CONCLUSIONS: Thanks to the additional information obtained from multiple samples,
we could efficiently detect significant segments corresponding to rare CNVs
responsible for pathogenic changes. The robust statistical framework applied in
our method enables to eliminate the influence of widespread technical artifact
termed 'waves'.

PMCID: PMC3691624
PMID: 23758813  [PubMed]


19. Transl Psychiatry. 2013 Jun 11;3:e270. doi: 10.1038/tp.2013.48.

AKAPs integrate genetic findings for autism spectrum disorders.

Poelmans G(1), Franke B, Pauls DL, Glennon JC, Buitelaar JK.

Author information: 
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. g.poelmans@donders.ru.nl

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are highly heritable, and six genome-wide
association studies (GWASs) of ASDs have been published to date. In this study,
we have integrated the findings from these GWASs with other genetic data to
identify enriched genetic networks that are associated with ASDs. We conducted
bioinformatics and systematic literature analyses of 200 top-ranked ASD candidate
genes from five published GWASs. The sixth GWAS was used for replication and
validation of our findings. Further corroborating evidence was obtained through
rare genetic variant studies, that is, exome sequencing and copy number variation
(CNV) studies, and/or other genetic evidence, including candidate gene
association, microRNA and gene expression, gene function and genetic animal
studies. We found three signaling networks regulating steroidogenesis, neurite
outgrowth and (glutamatergic) synaptic function to be enriched in the data. Most 
genes from the five GWASs were also implicated--independent of gene size--in ASDs
by at least one other line of genomic evidence. Importantly, A-kinase anchor
proteins (AKAPs) functionally integrate signaling cascades within and between
these networks. The three identified protein networks provide an important
contribution to increasing our understanding of the molecular basis of ASDs. In
addition, our results point towards the AKAPs as promising targets for developing
novel ASD treatments.

PMCID: PMC3693406
PMID: 23756379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1561-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35941. Epub 2013
May 23.

Circadian abnormalities in mouse models of Smith-Magenis syndrome: evidence for
involvement of RAI1.

Lacaria M(1), Gu W, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS; OMIM 182290) is a genomic disorder characterized by 
multiple congenital anomalies, intellectual disability, behavioral abnormalities,
and disordered sleep resulting from an ~3.7 Mb deletion copy number variant (CNV)
on chromosome 17p11.2 or from point mutations in the gene RAI1. The reciprocal
duplication of this region results in another genomic disorder, Potocki-Lupski
syndrome (PTLS; OMIM 610883), characterized by autism, intellectual disability,
and congenital anomalies. We previously used chromosome-engineering and gene
targeting to generate mouse models for PTLS (Dp(11)17/+), and SMS due to either
deletion CNV or gene knock-out (Df(11)17-2/+ and Rai1(+/-) , respectively) and we
observed phenotypes in these mouse models consistent with their associated human 
syndromes. To investigate the contribution of individual genes to the circadian
phenotypes observed in SMS, we now report the analysis of free-running period
lengths in Rai1(+/-) and Df(11)17-2/+ mice, as well as in mice deficient for
another known circadian gene mapping within the commonly deleted/duplicated
region, Dexras1, and we compare these results to those previously observed in
Dp(11)17/+ mice. Reduced free-running period lengths were seen in Df(11)17-2/+,
Rai1(+/-) , and Dexras1(-/-) , but not Dexras1(+/-) mice, suggesting that Rai1
may be the primary gene underlying the circadian defects in SMS. However, we
cannot rule out the possibility that cis effects between multiple
haploinsufficient genes in the SMS critical interval (e.g., RAI1 and DEXRAS1)
either exacerbate the circadian phenotypes observed in SMS patients with
deletions or increase their penetrance in certain environments. This study also
confirms a previous report of abnormal circadian function in Dexras1(-/-) mice.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4086898
PMID: 23703963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;22(1):105-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.99. Epub 2013 May
22.

Neurodevelopmental disorders among individuals with duplication of 4p13 to 4p12
containing a GABAA receptor subunit gene cluster.

Polan MB(1), Pastore MT(2), Steingass K(3), Hashimoto S(4), Thrush DL(5), Pyatt
R(5), Reshmi S(5), Gastier-Foster JM(6), Astbury C(5), McBride KL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Human Genetics, The Research Institute, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (2)1] Division of Molecular and Human
Genetics, The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH,
USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)1] Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] 
Division of Behavioral Pediatrics, The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (5)1] 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Research Institute,
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of Pathology,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (6)1] Department of Pediatrics, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, OH, USA [3] Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA. (7)1] Division of Molecular and Human Genetics, The Research
Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of
Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [3] Center for
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, The Research Institute, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Recent studies have shown that certain copy number variations (CNV) are
associated with a wide range of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism
spectrum disorders (ASD), bipolar disorder and intellectual disabilities.
Implicated regions and genes have comprised a variety of post synaptic complex
proteins and neurotransmitter receptors, including gamma-amino butyric acid A
(GABAA). Clusters of GABAA receptor subunit genes are found on chromosomes 4p12, 
5q34, 6q15 and 15q11-13. Maternally inherited 15q11-13 duplications among
individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders are well described, but few case
reports exist for the other regions. We describe a family with a 2.42 Mb
duplication at chromosome 4p13 to 4p12, identified in the index case and other
family members by oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization, that
contains 13 genes including a cluster of four GABAA receptor subunit genes.
Fluorescent in-situ hybridization was used to confirm the duplication. The
duplication segregates with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders in this
family, including ASD (index case), developmental delay, dyspraxia and ADHD
(brother), global developmental delays (brother), learning disabilities (mother) 
and bipolar disorder (maternal grandmother). In addition, we identified and
describe another individual unrelated to this family, with a similar duplication,
who was diagnosed with ASD, ADHD and borderline intellectual disability. The 4p13
to 4p12 duplication appears to confer a susceptibility to a variety of
neurodevelopmental disorders in these two families. We hypothesize that the
duplication acts through a dosage effect of GABAA receptor subunit genes, adding 
evidence for alterations in the GABAergic system in the etiology of
neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC3865421
PMID: 23695283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 May;19(5):568-72. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.59. Epub 2013 May 21.

High rate of disease-related copy number variations in childhood onset
schizophrenia.

Ahn K(1), Gotay N(1), Andersen TM(1), Anvari AA(1), Gochman P(1), Lee Y(1),
Sanders S(2), Guha S(3), Darvasi A(4), Glessner JT(5), Hakonarson H(5), Lencz
T(3), State MW(2), Shugart YY(6), Rapoport JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Childhood Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Program on Neurogenetics, Child Study
Center, Department of Psychiatry, Department of Genetics, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (3)The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Psychiatry
Research, Glen Oaks, NY, USA. (4)Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (6)Unit of Statistical Genomics, National Institute of
Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are risk factors in neurodevelopmental disorders,
including autism, epilepsy, intellectual disability (ID) and schizophrenia.
Childhood onset schizophrenia (COS), defined as onset before the age of 13 years,
is a rare and severe form of the disorder, with more striking array of
prepsychotic developmental disorders and abnormalities in brain development.
Because of the well-known phenotypic variability associated with pathogenic CNVs,
we conducted whole genome genotyping to detect CNVs and then focused on a group
of 46 rare CNVs that had well-documented risk for adult onset schizophrenia
(AOS), autism, epilepsy and/or ID. We evaluated 126 COS probands, 69 of which
also had a healthy full sibling. When COS probands were compared with their
matched related controls, significantly more affected individuals carried
disease-related CNVs (P=0.017). Moreover, COS probands showed a higher rate than 
that found in AOS probands (P<0.0001). A total of 15 (11.9%) subjects exhibited
at least one such CNV and four of these subjects (26.7%) had two. Five of 15
(4.0% of the sample) had a 2.5-3âMb deletion mapping to 22q11.2, a rate higher
than that reported for adult onset (0.3-1%) (P<0.001) or autism spectrum disorder
and, indeed, the highest rate reported for any clinical population to date. For
one COS subject, a duplication found at 22q13.3 had previously only been
associated with autism, and for four patients CNVs at 8q11.2, 10q22.3, 16p11.2
and 17q21.3 had only previously been associated with ID. Taken together, these
findings support the well-known pleiotropic effects of these CNVs suggesting
shared abnormalities early in brain development. Clinically, broad CNV-based
population screening is needed to assess their overall clinical burden.

PMID: 23689535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1722-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35946. Epub 2013
May 17.

Deletions of 16p11.2 and 19p13.2 in a family with intellectual disability and
generalized epilepsy.

Bassuk AG(1), Geraghty E, Wu S, Mullen SA, Berkovic SF, Scheffer IE, Mefford HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Rare copy number variants (CNVs) have been established as an important cause of
various neurodevelopmental disorders, including intellectual disability (ID) and 
epilepsy. In some cases, a second CNV may contribute to a more severe clinical
presentation. Here we present two siblings and their mother who have mild ID,
short stature, obesity and seizures. Array CGH studies show that each affected
individual has two large, rare CNVs. The first is a deletion of chromosome
16p11.2, which has been previously associated with ID and autism. The second is a
0.9 Mb deletion of 19p13.2, which results in the deletion of a cluster of zinc
finger genes. We suggest that, while the 16p11.2 deletion is likely the primary
cause of the obesity and ID in this family, the 19p13.2 deletion may act as a
modifier of the epilepsy phenotype, which is not a core feature of the 16p11.2
deletion syndrome. We investigate the potential role of ZNF44, a gene within the 
deleted region, in a cohort of patients with generalized epilepsy.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4169108
PMID: 23686817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Psychol Med. 2014 Apr;44(5):1101-16. doi: 10.1017/S0033291713001049. Epub 2013
May 15.

Attention and inhibition in children with ASD, ADHD and co-morbid ASDÂ +Â ADHD: an 
event-related potential study.

Tye C(1), Asherson P(1), Ashwood KL(2), Azadi B(2), Bolton P(1), McLoughlin G(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, UK. (2)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Substantial overlap has been reported between attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Deficits in
executive function (EF) are characteristic of both disorders but these
impairments have not been compared directly across pure and co-morbid cases using
event-related potentials (ERPs).
METHOD: Behavioural parameters and ERPs were recorded during a flankered
cued-continuous performance test (CPT-OX) administered to 8-13-year-old boys with
ASD (n = 19), ADHD (n = 18), co-morbid ASD + ADHD (n = 29) and typically
developing controls (TD; n = 26). Preparatory processing (contingent negative
variation, CNV) and attentional orienting (Cue-P3) at cues, response execution at
targets (Go-P3), inhibitory processing at non-targets (NoGo-P3) and conflict
monitoring between target and non-target trials (Go-N2 v. NoGo-N2) were examined.
RESULTS: Categorical diagnoses and quantitative trait measures indicated that
participants with ADHD (ADHD/ASD + ADHD) made more omission errors and exhibited 
increased reaction-time (RT) variability and reduced amplitude of the Cue-P3 and 
NoGo-P3 compared to TD/ASD participants. Participants with ASD (ASD/ ASD + ADHD) 
demonstrated reduced N2 enhancement from Go to NoGo trials compared to TD/ADHD
participants. Participants with ASD-only displayed enhanced CNV amplitude
compared to ASD + ADHD and TD participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with ADHD show deficits in attentional orienting and
inhibitory control whereas children with ASD show abnormalities in conflict
monitoring and response preparation. Children with co-morbid ASD + ADHD present
as an additive co-occurrence with deficits of both disorders, although
non-additive effects are suggested for response preparation. Measuring ERPs that 
index attention and inhibition is useful in disentangling cognitive markers of
ASD and ADHD and elucidating the basis of co-occurring ASD + ADHD to guide
clinical assessment.

PMID: 23673307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Jul;13(6):887-99.

An EJC factor RBM8a regulates anxiety behaviors.

Alachkar A(1), Jiang D, Harrison M, Zhou Y, Chen G, Mao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Neuroplasticity depends on the precise timing of gene expression, which requires 
accurate control of mRNA stability and rapid elimination of abnormal mRNA.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is an RNA surveillance mechanism that ensures 
the speedy degradation of mRNAs carrying premature termination codons (PTCs).
This mechanism relies on several key Exon Junction Complex (EJC) factors to
distinguish PTCs from normal stop codons. NMD degrades not only aberrant
transcripts carrying PTCs, but also normal transcripts harboring a normal stop
codon [1]. Intriguingly, mutations in an NMD factor, Upf3b, have been found in
patients with autism [2, 3]. A binding partner of Upf3b, RBM8a, is located in the
1q21.1 copy-number variation (CNV) associated with mental retardation, autism
[4], schizophrenia [5], and microcephaly [6]. However, the functions of EJC
factors and their roles in behavioral regulation are still elusive. RBM8a protein
is a core component of the EJC that plays an important role in NMD. Recent
genetic study indicated that RBM8a gain-of-function significantly associated with
intellectual disability [7]. In this study we investigated the effect of RBM8a
overexpression on affective behaviors in mice. Lentivirus expressing RBM8a was
infused into the hippocampus of adult mice to conduct behavioral studies
including social interaction, open field, elevated plus maze, and forced swimming
tests. Our results showed that overexpression of RBM8a in the mouse dentate gyrus
(DG) leads to increased anxiety-like behavior, abnormal social interaction and
decreased immobile time in forced swimming test (FST). To examine the underlying 
mechanism, we found that overexpressing RBM8a in cultured primary neurons lead to
significant higher frequency of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents
(mEPSCs). To explore the underlying mechanism of RBM8a mediated behavioral
changes, RNA-immunoprecipitation (RNA-IP) detected that RBM8a binds to CaMK2,
GluR1 and Egr1 mRNA, suggesting that RBM8a may target neuronal genes to regulate 
behaviors. This is the first study that demonstrates the key role of RBM8a on the
emotional behaviors in mice. These results reveal new neural mechanisms by which 
NMD modulates behaviors and potentially provide a better understanding of
pathophysiology underlying psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 23638902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Pediatr. 2013 Sep;163(3):890-5.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.02.043. Epub 2013 
Apr 19.

Intellectual disability in children with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder.

Ahuja A(1), Martin J, Langley K, Thapar A.

Author information: 
(1)Ty Bryn Unit, St Cadocs Hospital, Newport, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether children with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) and mild intellectual disability (ID) are a clinically distinct
ADHD subgroup.
STUDY DESIGN: This was a cross-sectional study comparing clinical characteristics
(ADHD subtypes, total number of symptoms, and rates of common comorbidities)
between children with ADHD and mild ID and those with ADHD and IQ test scores
>70, and also between children with ADHD and ID and a general population sample
of children with ID alone. The sample comprised a clinical sample of children
with ADHD with ID (n = 97) and without ID (nÂ =Â 874) and a general population
sample of children with ID and without ADHD (n = 58).
RESULTS: After correcting for multiple statistical tests, no differences were
found between the 2 ADHD groups on any measure except the presence of conduct
disorder (CD) symptoms and diagnoses. Children with ADHD and ID had higher rates 
of both (OR, 2.38; 95% CI, 1.71-3.32 and OR, 2.69; 95% CI, 1.69-4.28,
respectively). Furthermore, children with ADHD and ID had significantly higher
rates of oppositional defiant disorder (OR, 5.54; 95% CI, 2.86-10.75) and CD (OR,
13.66; 95% CI, 3.25-57.42) symptoms and a higher incidence of oppositional
defiant disorder diagnoses (OR, 30.99; 95% CI, 6.38-150.39) compared with
children with ID without ADHD.
CONCLUSION: Children with ADHD and mild ID appear to be clinically typical of
children with ADHD except for more conduct problems. This finding has
implications for clinicians treating these children in terms of acknowledging
theÂ presence and impact of ADHD symptoms above and beyond ID and dealing with a
comorbid CD.

Copyright Â© 2013 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4078221
PMID: 23608559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jul 15;22(14):2960-72. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt150. Epub 2013 Apr
10.

An eQTL mapping approach reveals that rare variants in the SEMA5A regulatory
network impact autism risk.

Cheng Y(1), Quinn JF, Weiss LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

To date, genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number variant
(CNV) association studies of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have led to
promising signals but not to easily interpretable or translatable results. Our
own genome-wide association study (GWAS) showed significant association to an
intergenic SNP near Semaphorin 5A (SEMA5A) and provided evidence for reduced
expression of the same gene. In a novel GWAS follow-up approach, we map an
expression regulatory pathway for a GWAS candidate gene, SEMA5A, in silico by
using population expression and genotype data sets. We find that the SEMA5A
regulatory network significantly overlaps rare autism-specific CNVs. The SEMA5A
regulatory network includes previous autism candidate genes and regions,
including MACROD2, A2BP1, MCPH1, MAST4, CDH8, CADM1, FOXP1, AUTS2, MBD5, 7q21,
20p, USH2A, KIRREL3, DBF4B and RELN, among others. Our results provide: (i) a
novel data-derived network implicated in autism, (ii) evidence that the same
pathway seeded by an initial SNP association shows association with rare genetic 
variation in ASDs, (iii) a potential mechanism of action and interpretation for
the previous autism candidate genes and genetic variants that fall in this
network, and (iv) a novel approach that can be applied to other candidate genes
for complex genetic disorders. We take a step towards better understanding of the
significance of SEMA5A pathways in autism that can guide interpretation of many
other genetic results in ASDs.

PMCID: PMC3690972
PMID: 23575222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS Genet. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003349. Epub 2013 
Mar 21.

Human spermatogenic failure purges deleterious mutation load from the autosomes
and both sex chromosomes, including the gene DMRT1.

Lopes AM(1), Aston KI, Thompson E, Carvalho F, GonÃ§alves J, Huang N, Matthiesen
R, Noordam MJ, Quintela I, Ramu A, Seabra C, Wilfert AB, Dai J, Downie JM,
Fernandes S, Guo X, Sha J, Amorim A, Barros A, Carracedo A, Hu Z, Hurles ME,
Moskovtsev S, Ober C, Paduch DA, Schiffman JD, Schlegel PN, Sousa M, Carrell DT, 
Conrad DF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal.

Gonadal failure, along with early pregnancy loss and perinatal death, may be an
important filter that limits the propagation of harmful mutations in the human
population. We hypothesized that men with spermatogenic impairment, a disease
with unknown genetic architecture and a common cause of male infertility, are
enriched for rare deleterious mutations compared to men with normal
spermatogenesis. After assaying genomewide SNPs and CNVs in 323 Caucasian men
with idiopathic spermatogenic impairment and more than 1,100 controls, we
estimate that each rare autosomal deletion detected in our study multiplicatively
changes a man's risk of disease by 10% (OR 1.10 [1.04-1.16], p<2 Ã 10(-3)), rare 
X-linked CNVs by 29%, (OR 1.29 [1.11-1.50], p<1 Ã 10(-3)), and rare Y-linked
duplications by 88% (OR 1.88 [1.13-3.13], p<0.03). By contrasting the properties 
of our case-specific CNVs with those of CNV callsets from cases of autism,
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and intellectual disability, we propose that the
CNV burden in spermatogenic impairment is distinct from the burden of large,
dominant mutations described for neurodevelopmental disorders. We identified two 
patients with deletions of DMRT1, a gene on chromosome 9p24.3 orthologous to the 
putative sex determination locus of the avian ZW chromosome system. In an
independent sample of Han Chinese men, we identified 3 more DMRT1 deletions in
979 cases of idiopathic azoospermia and none in 1,734 controls, and found none in
an additional 4,519 controls from public databases. The combined results indicate
that DMRT1 loss-of-function mutations are a risk factor and potential genetic
cause of human spermatogenic failure (frequency of 0.38% in 1306 cases and 0% in 
7,754 controls, p = 6.2 Ã 10(-5)). Our study identifies other recurrent CNVs as
potential causes of idiopathic azoospermia and generates hypotheses for directing
future studies on the genetic basis of male infertility and IVF outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3605256
PMID: 23555275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jul 15;22(14):2870-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt136. Epub 2013 Mar
27.

Global increases in both common and rare copy number load associated with autism.

Girirajan S(1), Johnson RL, Tassone F, Balciuniene J, Katiyar N, Fox K, Baker C, 
Srikanth A, Yeoh KH, Khoo SJ, Nauth TB, Hansen R, Ritchie M, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Eichler EE, Pessah IN, Selleck SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. sxg47@psu.edu

Children with autism have an elevated frequency of large, rare copy number
variants (CNVs). However, the global load of deletions or duplications, per se,
and their size, location and relationship to clinical manifestations of autism
have not been documented. We examined CNV data from 516 individuals with autism
or typical development from the population-based Childhood Autism Risks from
Genetics and Environment (CHARGE) study. We interrogated 120 regions flanked by
segmental duplications (genomic hotspots) for events >50 kbp and the entire
genomic backbone for variants >300 kbp using a custom targeted DNA microarray.
This analysis was complemented by a separate study of five highly dynamic
hotspots associated with autism or developmental delay syndromes, using a finely 
tiled array platform (>1 kbp) in 142 children matched for gender and ethnicity.
In both studies, a significant increase in the number of base pairs of
duplication, but not deletion, was associated with autism. Significantly elevated
levels of CNV load remained after the removal of rare and likely pathogenic
events. Further, the entire CNV load detected with the finely tiled array was
contributed by common variants. The impact of this variation was assessed by
examining the correlation of clinical outcomes with CNV load. The level of
personal and social skills, measured by Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales,
negatively correlated (Spearman's r = -0.13, P = 0.034) with the duplication CNV 
load for the affected children; the strongest association was found for
communication (P = 0.048) and socialization (P = 0.022) scores. We propose that
CNV load, predominantly increased genomic base pairs of duplication, predisposes 
to autism.

PMCID: PMC3690969
PMID: 23535821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059061. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

CNV analysis in Tourette syndrome implicates large genomic rearrangements in
COL8A1 and NRXN1.

Nag A(1), Bochukova EG, Kremeyer B, Campbell DD, Muller H, Valencia-Duarte AV,
Cardona J, Rivas IC, Mesa SC, Cuartas M, Garcia J, Bedoya G, Cornejo W, Herrera
LD, Romero R, Fournier E, Reus VI, Lowe TL, Farooqi IS; Tourette Syndrome
Association International Consortium for Genetics, Mathews CA, McGrath LM, Yu D, 
Cook E, Wang K, Scharf JM, Pauls DL, Freimer NB, Plagnol V, Ruiz-Linares A.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Genetics Institute, Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment,
University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Tourette syndrome (TS) is a neuropsychiatric disorder with a strong genetic
component. However, the genetic architecture of TS remains uncertain. Copy number
variation (CNV) has been shown to contribute to the genetic make-up of several
neurodevelopmental conditions, including schizophrenia and autism. Here we
describe CNV calls using SNP chip genotype data from an initial sample of 210 TS 
cases and 285 controls ascertained in two Latin American populations. After
extensive quality control, we found that cases (Nâ=â179) have a significant
excess (Pâ=â0.006) of large CNV (>500 kb) calls compared to controls (Nâ=â234).
Amongst 24 large CNVs seen only in the cases, we observed four duplications of
the COL8A1 gene region. We also found two cases with â¼400 kb deletions involving 
NRXN1, a gene previously implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders, including
TS. Follow-up using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (and
including 53 more TS cases) validated the CNV calls and identified additional
patients with rearrangements in COL8A1 and NRXN1, but none in controls.
Examination of available parents indicates that two out of three NRXN1 deletions 
detected in the TS cases are de-novo mutations. Our results are consistent with
the proposal that rare CNVs play a role in TS aetiology and suggest a possible
role for rearrangements in the COL8A1 and NRXN1 gene regions.

PMCID: PMC3606459
PMID: 23533600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Front Genet. 2013 Mar 14;4:32. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00032. eCollection 2013.

Sex bias in copy number variation of olfactory receptor gene family depends on
ethnicity.

Shadravan F.

Gender plays a pivotal role in the human genetic identity and is also manifested 
in many genetic disorders particularly mental retardation. In this study its
effect on copy number variation (CNV), known to cause genetic disorders was
explored. As the olfactory receptor (OR) repertoire comprises the largest human
gene family, it was selected for this study, which was carried out within and
between three populations, derived from 150 individuals from the 1000 Genome
Project. Analysis of 3872 CNVs detected among 791 OR loci, in which 307 loci
showed CNV, revealed the following novel findings: Sex bias in CNV was
significantly more prevalent in uncommon than common CNV variants of OR
pseudogenes, in which the male genome showed more CNVs; and in one-copy number
loss compared to complete deletion of OR pseudogenes; both findings implying a
more recent evolutionary role for gender. Sex bias in copy number gain was also
detected. Another novel finding was that the observed sex bias was largely
dependent on ethnicity and was in general absent in East Asians. Using a CNV
public database for sick children (International Standard Cytogenomic Array
Consortium) the application of these findings for improving clinical molecular
diagnostics is discussed by showing an example of sex bias in CNV among kids with
autism. Additional clinical relevance is discussed, as the most polymorphic
CNV-enriched OR cluster in the human genome, located on chr 15q11.2, is found
near the Prader-Willi syndrome/Angelman syndrome bi-directionally imprinted
region associated with two well-known mental retardation syndromes. As olfaction 
represents the primitive cognition in most mammals, arguably in competition with 
the development of a larger brain, the extensive retention of OR pseudogenes in
females of this study, might point to a parent-of-origin indirect regulatory role
for OR pseudogenes in the embryonic development of human brain. Thus any
perturbation in the temporal regulation of olfactory system could lead to
developmental delay disorders including mental retardation.

PMCID: PMC3596775
PMID: 23503716  [PubMed]


32. Autism Res. 2013 Aug;6(4):268-79. doi: 10.1002/aur.1284. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

The interstitial duplication 15q11.2-q13 syndrome includes autism, mild facial
anomalies and a characteristic EEG signature.

Urraca N(1), Cleary J, Brewer V, Pivnick EK, McVicar K, Thibert RL, Schanen NC,
Esmer C, Lamport D, Reiter LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Chromosomal copy number variants (CNV) are the most common genetic lesion found
in autism. Many autism-associated CNVs are duplications of chromosome 15q.
Although most cases of interstitial (int) dup(15) that present clinically are de 
novo and maternally derived or inherited, both pathogenic and unaffected paternal
duplications of 15q have been identified. We performed a phenotype/genotype
analysis of individuals with interstitial 15q duplications to broaden our
understanding of the 15q syndrome and investigate the contribution of 15q
duplication to increased autism risk. All subjects were recruited solely on the
basis of interstitial duplication 15q11.2-q13 status. Comparative array genome
hybridization was used to determine the duplication size and boundaries while the
methylation status of the maternally methylated small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
polypeptide N gene was used to determine the parent of origin of the duplication.
We determined the duplication size and parental origin for 14 int dup(15)
subjects: 10 maternal and 4 paternal cases. The majority of int dup(15) cases
recruited were maternal in origin, most likely due to our finding that maternal
duplication was coincident with autism spectrum disorder. The size of the
duplication did not correlate with the severity of the phenotype as established
by Autism Diagnostic Observation Scale calibrated severity score. We identified
phenotypes not comprehensively described before in this cohort including mild
facial dysmorphism, sleep problems and an unusual electroencephalogram variant.
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the maternally expressed
ubiquitin protein ligase E3A gene is primarily responsible for the autism
phenotype in int dup(15) since all maternal cases tested presented on the autism 
spectrum.

Â© 2013 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3884762
PMID: 23495136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56781. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056781. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Insights on the functional impact of microRNAs present in autism-associated copy 
number variants.

Vaishnavi V(1), Manikandan M, Tiwary BK, Munirajan AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dr. ALM PG Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Autism spectrum disorder is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder that appears
during the first three years of infancy and lasts throughout a person's life.
Recently a large category of genomic structural variants, denoted as copy number 
variants (CNVs), were established to be a major contributor of the
pathophysiology of autism. To date almost all studies have focussed only on the
genes present in the CNV loci, but the impact of non-coding regulatory microRNAs 
(miRNAs) present in these regions remain largely unexplored. Hence we attempted
to elucidate the biological and functional significance of miRNAs present in
autism-associated CNV loci and their target genes by using a series of
computational tools. We demonstrate that nearly 11% of the CNV loci harbor miRNAs
and a few of these miRNAs were previously reported to be associated with autism. 
A systematic analysis of the CNV-miRNAs based on their interactions with the
target genes enabled the identification of top 10 miRNAs namely hsa-miR-590-3p,
hsa-miR-944, hsa-miR-570, hsa-miR-34a, hsa-miR-124, hsa-miR-548f, hsa-miR-429,
hsa-miR-200b, hsa-miR-195 and hsa-miR-497 as hub molecules. Further, the
CNV-miRNAs formed a regulatory loop with transcription factors and their
downstream target genes, and annotation of these target genes indicated their
functional involvement in neurodevelopment and synapse. Moreover, miRNAs present 
in deleted and duplicated CNV loci may explain the difference in dosage of the
crucial genes controlled by them. These CNV-miRNAs can also impair the global
processing and biogenesis of all miRNAs by targeting key molecules in the miRNA
pathway. To our knowledge, this is the first report to highlight the significance
of CNV-microRNAs and their target genes to contribute towards the genetic
heterogeneity and phenotypic variability of autism.

PMCID: PMC3581547
PMID: 23451085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biostatistics. 2013 Jul;14(3):600-11. doi: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxt003. Epub
2013 Feb 20.

Quantifying copy number variations using a hidden Markov model with inhomogeneous
emission distributions.

McCallum KJ(1), Wang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.
kennethmccallum2013@u.northwestern.edu

Copy number variations (CNVs) are a significant source of genetic variation and
have been found frequently associated with diseases such as cancers and autism.
High-throughput sequencing data are increasingly being used to detect and
quantify CNVs; however, the distributional properties of the data are not fully
understood. A hidden Markov model (HMM) is proposed using inhomogeneous emission 
distributions based on negative binomial regression to account for the sequencing
biases. The model is tested on the whole genome sequencing data and simulated
data sets. An algorithm for CNV detection is implemented in the R package
CNVfinder. The model based on negative binomial regression is shown to provide a 
good fit to the data and provides competitive performance compared with methods
based on normalization of read counts.

PMID: 23428932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Med Genet. 2013 Mar;50(3):163-73. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101288. Epub 2013
Jan 18.

Deletions in 16q24.2 are associated with autism spectrum disorder, intellectual
disability and congenital renal malformation.

Handrigan GR(1), Chitayat D, Lionel AC, Pinsk M, Vaags AK, Marshall CR, Dyack S, 
Escobar LF, Fernandez BA, Stegman JC, Rosenfeld JA, Shaffer LG, Goodenberger M,
Hodge JC, Cain JE, Babul-Hirji R, Stavropoulos DJ, Yiu V, Scherer SW, Rosenblum
ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G1X8. norman.rosenblum@sickkids.ca

Erratum in
    J Med Genet. 2013 Apr;50(4):270.

BACKGROUND: The contribution of copy-number variation (CNV) to disease has been
highlighted with the widespread adoption of array-based comparative genomic
hybridisation (aCGH) and microarray technology. Contiguous gene deletions
involving ANKRD11 in 16q24.3 are associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
and intellectual disability (ID), while 16q24.1 deletions affecting FOXF1 are
associated with congenital renal malformations, alveolar capillary dysplasia, and
various other abnormalities. The disease associations of deletions in the
intervening region, 16q24.2, have only been defined to a limited extent.
AIM: To determine whether deletions affecting 16q24.2 are correlated with
congenital anomalies.
METHODS: 35 individuals, each having a deletion in 16q24.2, were characterised
clinically and by aCGH and/or SNP-genotyping microarray.
RESULTS: Several of the 35 16q24.2 deletions identified here closely abut or
overlap the coding regions of FOXF1 and ANKRD11, two genes that have been
previously associated with the disease. 25 patients were reported to have ASD/ID,
and three were found to have bilateral hydronephrosis. 14 of the deletions
associated with ASD/ID overlap the coding regions of FBXO31 and MAP1LC3B. These
same genes and two others, C16orf95 and ZCCHC14, are also included in the area of
minimal overlap of the three deletions associated with hydronephrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data highlight 16q24.2 as a region of interest for ASD, ID and
congenital renal malformations. These conditions are associated, albeit without
complete penetrance, with deletions affecting C16orf95, ZCCHC14, MAP1LC3B and
FBXO31. The function of each gene in development and disease warrants further
investigation.

PMID: 23335808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Hum Genet. 2013 Apr;132(4):443-50. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1261-4. Epub 2013 Jan 
13.

Increased paternal age and the influence on burden of genomic copy number
variation in the general population.

Buizer-Voskamp JE(1), Blauw HM, Boks MP, van Eijk KR, Veldink JH, Hennekam EA,
Vorstman JA, Mulder F, Tiemeier H, Uitterlinden AG, Kiemeney LA, van den Berg LH,
Kahn RS, Sabatti C, Ophoff RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
J.E.Buizer@umcutrecht.nl

Genomic copy number variations (CNVs) and increased parental age are both
associated with the risk to develop a variety of clinical neuropsychiatric
disorders such as autism, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. At the same time,
it has been shown that the rate of transmitted de novo single nucleotide
mutations is increased with paternal age. To address whether paternal age also
affects the burden of structural genomic deletions and duplications, we examined 
various types of CNV burden in a large population sample from the Netherlands.
Healthy participants with parental age information (nÂ =Â 6,773) were collected at 
different University Medical Centers. CNVs were called with the PennCNV algorithm
using Illumina genome-wide SNP array data. We observed no evidence in support of 
a paternal age effect on CNV load in the offspring. Our results were negative for
global measures as well as several proxies for de novo CNV events in this unique 
sample. While recent studies suggest de novo single nucleotide mutation rate to
be dominated by the age of the father at conception, our results strongly suggest
that at the level of global CNV burden there is no influence of increased
paternal age. While it remains possible that local genomic effects may exist for 
specific phenotypes, this study indicates that global CNV burden and increased
father's age may be independent disease risk factors.

PMID: 23315237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Child Dev. 2013 Jan-Feb;84(1):121-32. doi: 10.1111/cdev.12050. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

The utility of chromosomal microarray analysis in developmental and behavioral
pediatrics.

Beaudet AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine. abeaudet@bcm.edu

Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) has emerged as a powerful new tool to
identify genomic abnormalities associated with a wide range of developmental
disabilities including congenital malformations, cognitive impairment, and
behavioral abnormalities. CMA includes array comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH) and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays, both of which are useful
for detection of genomic copy number variants (CNV) such as microdeletions and
microduplications. The frequency of disease-causing CNVs is highest (20%-25%) in 
children with moderate to severe intellectual disability accompanied by
malformations or dysmorphic features. Disease-causing CNVs are found in 5%-10% of
cases of autism, being more frequent in severe phenotypes. CMA has replaced
Giemsa-banded karyotype as the first-tier test for genetic evaluation of children
with developmental and behavioral disabilities.

Â© 2013 The Author. Child Development Â© 2013 Society for Research in Child
Development, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3725967
PMID: 23311723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e37385. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037385. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Genetic copy number variation and general cognitive ability.

MacLeod AK(1), Davies G, Payton A, Tenesa A, Harris SE, Liewald D, Ke X, Luciano 
M, Lopez LM, Gow AJ, Corley J, Redmond P, McNeill G, Pickles A, Ollier W, Horan
M, Starr JM, Pendleton N, Thomson PA, Porteous DJ, Deary IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. andrew.macleod@ed.ac.uk

Differences in genomic structure between individuals are ubiquitous features of
human genetic variation. Specific copy number variants (CNVs) have been
associated with susceptibility to numerous complex psychiatric disorders,
including attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder, autism-spectrum disorders and
schizophrenia. These disorders often display co-morbidity with low intelligence. 
Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications are associated with these disorders, 
so it has been suggested that these deletions or duplications may be associated
with differences in intelligence. Here we investigate associations between large 
(â¥500kb), rare (<1% population frequency) CNVs and both fluid and crystallized
intelligence in community-dwelling older people. We observe no significant
associations between intelligence and total CNV load. Examining individual CNV
regions previously implicated in neuropsychological disorders, we find suggestive
evidence that CNV regions around SHANK3 are associated with fluid intelligence as
derived from a battery of cognitive tests. This is the first study to examine the
effects of rare CNVs as called by multiple algorithms on cognition in a large
non-clinical sample, and finds no effects of such variants on general cognitive
ability.

PMCID: PMC3530597
PMID: 23300510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Dec;2(12):1665-85. doi: 10.1534/g3.112.004689. Epub 2012 Dec 
1.

A discovery resource of rare copy number variations in individuals with autism
spectrum disorder.

Prasad A(1), Merico D, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Wei J, Lionel AC, Sato D, Rickaby J,
Lu C, Szatmari P, Roberts W, Fernandez BA, Marshall CR, Hatchwell E, Eis PS,
Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto M5G 1L7, Canada.

The identification of rare inherited and de novo copy number variations (CNVs) in
human subjects has proven a productive approach to highlight risk genes for
autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A variety of microarrays are available to detect 
CNVs, including single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays and comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) arrays. Here, we examine a cohort of 696 unrelated
ASD cases using a high-resolution one-million feature CGH microarray, the
majority of which were previously genotyped with SNP arrays. Our objective was to
discover new CNVs in ASD cases that were not detected by SNP microarray analysis 
and to delineate novel ASD risk loci via combined analysis of CGH and SNP array
data sets on the ASD cohort and CGH data on an additional 1000 control samples.
Of the 615 ASD cases analyzed on both SNP and CGH arrays, we found that 13,572 of
21,346 (64%) of the CNVs were exclusively detected by the CGH array. Several of
the CGH-specific CNVs are rare in population frequency and impact previously
reported ASD genes (e.g., NRXN1, GRM8, DPYD), as well as novel ASD candidate
genes (e.g., CIB2, DAPP1, SAE1), and all were inherited except for a de novo CNV 
in the GPHN gene. A functional enrichment test of gene-sets in ASD cases over
controls revealed nucleotide metabolism as a potential novel pathway involved in 
ASD, which includes several candidate genes for follow-up (e.g., DPYD, UPB1,
UPP1, TYMP). Finally, this extensively phenotyped and genotyped ASD clinical
cohort serves as an invaluable resource for the next step of genome sequencing
for complete genetic variation detection.

PMCID: PMC3516488
PMID: 23275889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Apr 23;1(1):4. doi: 10.1186/2049-9256-1-4. eCollection
2013.

NRXN1 deletions identified by array comparative genome hybridisation in a
clinical case series - further understanding of the relevance of NRXN1 to
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Curran S(1), Ahn JW(2), Grayton H(3), Collier DA(3), Ogilvie CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, Kings 
College London, De Crespigny Park, Denmark Hill, London, SE5 8AF UK.
(2)Cytogenetics Department, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London,
UK. (3)MRC Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, De Crespigny Park, Denmark Hill, London, SE5
8AF UK.

BACKGROUND: Microdeletions in the NRXN1 gene have been associated with a range of
neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia,
intellectual disability, speech and language delay, epilepsy and hypotonia.
RESULTS: In the present study we performed array CGH analysis on 10,397
individuals referred for diagnostic cytogenetic analysis, using a custom
oligonucleotide array, which included 215 NRXN1 probes (median spacing 4.9Â kb).
We found 34 NRXN1 deletions (0.33% of referrals) ranging from 9 to 942Â kb in
size, of which 18 were exonic (0.17%). Three deletions affected exons also in the
beta isoform of NRXN1. No duplications were found. Patients had a range of
phenotypes including developmental delay, learning difficulties, attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, speech delay, social communication
difficulties, epilepsy, behaviour problems and microcephaly. Five patients who
had deletions in NRXN1 had a second CNV implicated in neurodevelopmental
disorder: a CNTNAP2 and CSMD3 deletion in patients with exonic NRXN1 deletions,
and a Williams-Beuren syndrome deletion and two 22q11.2 duplications in patients 
with intronic NRXN1 deletions.
CONCLUSIONS: Exonic deletions in the NRXN1 gene, predominantly affecting the
alpha isoform, were found in patients with a range of neurodevelopmental
disorders referred for diagnostic cytogenetic analysis. The targeting of dense
oligonucleotide probes to the NRXN1 locus on array comparative hybridisation
platforms provides detailed characterisation of deletions in this gene, and is
likely to add to understanding of the importance of NRXN1 in neural development.

PMCID: PMC4223877
PMID: 25408897  [PubMed]


1. Genet Med. 2014 Dec 18. doi: 10.1038/gim.2014.180. [Epub ahead of print]

SG-ADVISER CNV: copy-number variant annotation and interpretation.

Erikson GA(1), Deshpande N(1), Kesavan BG(1), Torkamani A(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Scripps Health, La Jolla, California, USA [2] Scripps Translational Science
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. (2)1] Scripps Health, La Jolla, California,
USA [2] Scripps Translational Science Institute, La Jolla, California, USA [3]
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA [4] Cypher Genomics, La Jolla, California,
USA.

Purpose:Copy-number variants have been associated with a variety of diseases,
especially cancer, autism, schizophrenia, and developmental delay. The majority
of clinically relevant events occur de novo, necessitating the interpretation of 
novel events. In this light, we present the Scripps Genome ADVISER CNV annotation
pipeline and Web server, which aims to fill the gap between copy number variant
detection and interpretation by performing in-depth annotations and functional
predictions for copy number variants.Methods:The Scripps Genome ADVISER CNV suite
includes a Web server interface to a high-performance computing environment for
calculations of annotations and a table-based user interface that allows for the 
execution of numerous annotation-based variant filtration strategies and
statistics.Results:The annotation results include details regarding location,
impact on the coding portion of genes, allele frequency information (including
allele frequencies from the Scripps Wellderly cohort), and overlap information
with other reference data sets (including ClinVar, DGV, DECIPHER). A summary
variant classification is produced (ADVISER score) based on the American College 
of Medical Genetics and Genomics scoring guidelines. We demonstrate >90%
sensitivity/specificity for detection of pathogenic events.Conclusion:Scripps
Genome ADVISER CNV is designed to allow users with no prior bioinformatics
expertise to manipulate large volumes of copy-number variant data. Scripps Genome
ADVISER CNV is available at http://genomics.scripps.edu/ADVISER/.Genet Med
advance online publication 18 December 2014Genetics in Medicine (2014);
doi:10.1038/gim.2014.180.

PMID: 25521334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;72(2):119-26. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.2147.

The role of parental cognitive, behavioral, and motor profiles in clinical
variability in individuals with chromosome 16p11.2 deletions.

Moreno-De-Luca A(1), Evans DW(2), Boomer KB(3), Hanson E(4), Bernier R(5),
Goin-Kochel RP(6), Myers SM(7), Challman TD(7), Moreno-De-Luca D(8), Slane MM(9),
Hare AE(9), Chung WK(10), Spiro JE(11), Faucett WA(12), Martin CL(12), Ledbetter 
DH(13).

Author information: 
(1)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System,
Lewisburg, Pennsylvania2Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, Pennsylvania3Department of Radiology, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, Pennsylvania4Program in N. (2)Autism and Developmental Medicine
Institute, Geisinger Health System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania4Program in
Neuroscience, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania5Department of
Psychology, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of
Mathematics, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. (4)Division of
Developmental Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts8Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas. (7)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health 
System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania4Program in Neuroscience, Bucknell University,
Lewisburg, Pennsylvania11Department of Pediatrics, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, Pennsylvania. (8)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut. (9)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health
System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. (10)Simons Foundation, New York, New
York14Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, New
York15Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York. (11)Simons
Foundation, New York, New York. (12)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, 
Geisinger Health System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania2Genomic Medicine Institute,
Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania. (13)Autism and Developmental
Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania2Genomic
Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania4Program in
Neuroscience, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania.

Comment in
    JAMA Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;72(2):106-7.

IMPORTANCE: Most disorders caused by copy number variants (CNVs) display
significant clinical variability, often referred to as incomplete penetrance and 
variable expressivity. Genetic and environmental sources of this variability are 
not well understood.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the contributors to phenotypic variability in probands
with CNVs involving the same genomic region; to measure the effect size for de
novo mutation events; and to explore the contribution of familial background to
resulting cognitive, behavioral, and motor performance outcomes in probands with 
de novo CNVs.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Family-based study design with a volunteer
sample of 56 individuals with de novo 16p11.2 deletions and their noncarrier
parents and siblings from the Simons Variation in Individuals Project.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: We used linear mixed-model analysis to measure effect
size and intraclass correlation to determine the influence of family background
for a de novo CNV on quantitative traits representing the following 3
neurodevelopmental domains: cognitive ability (Full-Scale IQ), social behavior
(Social Responsiveness Scale), and neuromotor performance (Purdue Pegboard Test).
We included an anthropometric trait, body mass index, for comparison.
RESULTS: A significant deleterious effect of the 16p11.2 deletion was
demonstrated across all domains. Relative to the biparental mean, the effect
sizes were -1.7 SD for cognitive ability, 2.2 SD for social behavior, and -1.3 SD
for neuromotor performance (Pâ<â.001). Despite large deleterious effects,
significant positive correlations between parents and probands were preserved for
the Full-Scale IQ (0.42 [Pâ=â.03]), the verbal IQ (0.53 [Pâ=â.004]), and the
Social Responsiveness Scale (0.52 [Pâ=â.009]) scores. We also observed a 1-SD
increase in the body mass index of probands compared with siblings, with an
intraclass correlation of 0.40 (Pâ=â.07).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Analysis of families with de novo CNVs provides the
least confounded estimate of the effect size of the 16p11.2 deletion on
heritable, quantitative traits and demonstrates a 1- to 2-SD effect across all
neurodevelopmental dimensions. Significant parent-proband correlations indicate
that family background contributes to the phenotypic variability seen in this and
perhaps other CNV disorders and may have implications for counseling families
regarding their children's developmental and psychiatric prognoses. Use of
biparental mean scores rather than general population mean scores may be more
relevant to examine the effect of a mutation or any other cause of trait
variation on a neurodevelopmental outcome and possibly on systems of diagnosis
and trait ascertainment for developmental disorders.

PMID: 25493922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hum Genet. 2015 Feb;134(2):191-201. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1513-6. Epub 2014 Nov
29.

Using extended pedigrees to identify novel autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
candidate genes.

Woodbury-Smith M(1), Paterson AD, Thiruvahindrapduram B, Lionel AC, Marshall CR, 
Merico D, Fernandez BA, Duku E, Sutcliffe JS, O'Conner I, Chrysler C, Thompson A,
Kellam B, Tammimies K, Walker S, Yuen RK, Uddin M, Howe JL, Parlier M, Whitten K,
Szatmari P, Vieland VJ, Piven J, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University,
Chedoke Campus (Evel Building, Room 457), Hamilton, ON, Canada,
woodbur@mcmaster.ca.

Copy number variation has emerged as an important cause of phenotypic variation, 
particularly in relation to some complex disorders. Autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) is one such disorder, in which evidence is emerging for an etiological role
for some rare penetrant de novo and rare inherited copy number variants (CNVs).
De novo variation, however, does not always explain the familial nature of ASD,
leaving a gap in our knowledge concerning the heritable genetic causes of this
disorder. Extended pedigrees, in which several members have ASD, provide an
opportunity to investigate inherited genetic risk factors. In this current study,
we recruited 19 extended ASD pedigrees, and, using the Illumina HumanOmni2.5
BeadChip, conducted genome-wide CNV interrogation. We found no definitive
evidence of an etiological role for segregating CNVs in these pedigrees, and no
evidence that linkage signals in these pedigrees are explained by segregating
CNVs. However, a small number of putative de novo variants were transmitted from 
BAP parents to their ASD offspring, and evidence emerged for a rare duplication
CNV at 11p13.3 harboring two putative 'developmental/neuropsychiatric'
susceptibility gene(s), GSTP1 and NDUFV1.

PMID: 25432440  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Nov 25. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.150. [Epub ahead of print]

The phenotypic manifestations of rare genic CNVs in autism spectrum disorder.

Merikangas AK(1), Segurado R(2), Heron EA(1), Anney RJ(1), Paterson AD(3), Cook
EH(4), Pinto D(5), Scherer SW(6), Szatmari P(7), Gill M(1), Corvin AP(1),
Gallagher L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Neuropsychiatric Genetics Research Group, Institute 
of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland. (2)Centre for
Support and Training in Analysis and Research, University College Dublin, Dublin 
4, Ireland. (3)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick
Children, Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Institute for Juvenile Research,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry, and Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Seaver Autism
Center, The Mindich Child Health & Development Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (6)Department of Molecular Genetics, 
The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (7)The
Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Significant evidence exists for the association between copy number variants
(CNVs) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD); however, most of this work has focused
solely on the diagnosis of ASD. There is limited understanding of the impact of
CNVs on the 'sub-phenotypes' of ASD. The objective of this paper is to evaluate
associations between CNVs in differentially brain expressed (DBE) genes or genes 
previously implicated in ASD/intellectual disability (ASD/ID) and specific
sub-phenotypes of ASD. The sample consisted of 1590 cases of European ancestry
from the Autism Genome Project (AGP) with a diagnosis of an ASD and at least one 
rare CNV impacting any gene and a core set of phenotypic measures, including
symptom severity, language impairments, seizures, gait disturbances, intelligence
quotient (IQ) and adaptive function, as well as paternal and maternal age.
Classification analyses using a non-parametric recursive partitioning method
(random forests) were employed to define sets of phenotypic characteristics that 
best classify the CNV-defined groups. There was substantial variation in the
classification accuracy of the two sets of genes. The best variables for
classification were verbal IQ for the ASD/ID genes, paternal age at birth for the
DBE genes and adaptive function for de novo CNVs. CNVs in the ASD/ID list were
primarily associated with communication and language domains, whereas CNVs in DBE
genes were related to broader manifestations of adaptive function. To our
knowledge, this is the first study to examine the associations between
sub-phenotypes and CNVs genome-wide in ASD. This work highlights the importance
of examining the diverse sub-phenotypic manifestations of CNVs in ASD, including 
the specific features, comorbid conditions and clinical correlates of ASD that
comprise underlying characteristics of the disorder.Molecular Psychiatry advance 
online publication, 25 November 2014; doi:10.1038/mp.2014.150.

PMID: 25421404  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Mol Autism. 2014 May 20;5:34. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-34. eCollection 2014.

The Autism Simplex Collection: an international, expertly phenotyped autism
sample for genetic and phenotypic analyses.

Buxbaum JD(1), Bolshakova N(2), Brownfeld JM(1), Anney RJ(2), Bender P(3),
Bernier R(4), Cook EH(5), Coon H(6), Cuccaro M(7), Freitag CM(8), Hallmayer J(9),
Geschwind D(10), Klauck SM(11), Nurnberger JI(12), Oliveira G(13), Pinto D(1),
Poustka F(8), Scherer SW(14), Shih A(15), Sutcliffe JS(16), Szatmari P(17),
Vicente AM(18), Vieland V(19), Gallagher L(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Department of Psychiatry,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York 10029, USA. (2)Autism Genetics 
Group, Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin 8,
Ireland. (3)National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), Bethesda, MD 20892-9663, 
USA. (4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (5)Institute for Juvenile Research,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60608,
USA. (6)Psychiatry Department, University of Utah Medical School, Salt Lake City,
UT 84108, USA. (7)The John P Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of 
Miami, Miami, FL 33101, USA. (8)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, JW Goethe University Frankfurt, 60528
Frankfurt, Germany. (9)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of California at Los Angeles, School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (11)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (12)Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (13)Unidade de
Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo do ServiÃ§o do Centro de Desenvolvimento da CrianÃ§a
and Centro de InvestigaÃ§Ã£o e FormaÃ§Ã£o Clinica, Pediatric Hospital, Centro
Hospitalar e UniversitÃ¡rio de Coimbra, 3000-602 Coimbra, Portugal ; University
Clinic of Pediatrics and Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Science,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, 3000-602 Coimbra, Portugal.
(14)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Centre for Applied Genomics, Hospital
for Sick Children and McLaughlin Centre and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (15)Autism Speaks, New York, NY 10016, USA. (16)Department of Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt Kennedy Center, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA ; Centers for Human Genetics Research and Molecular
Neuroscience, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (17)Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8N
3Z5, Canada. (18)Instituto Nacional de SaÃºde Dr Ricardo Jorge, 1649-016 Lisbon,
Portugal ; Instituto Gulbenkian de CiÃªncia, P-2781-901 Oeiras, Portugal ;
BioFIG-Center for Biodiversity, Functional & Integrative Genomics, Campus da
FCUL, C2.2.12, Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal. (19)The Research
Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is an urgent need for expanding and enhancing autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) samples, in order to better understand causes of ASD.
METHODS: In a unique public-private partnership, 13 sites with extensive
experience in both the assessment and diagnosis of ASD embarked on an ambitious, 
2-year program to collect samples for genetic and phenotypic research and begin
analyses on these samples. The program was called The Autism Simplex Collection
(TASC). TASC sample collection began in 2008 and was completed in 2010, and
included nine sites from North America and four sites from Western Europe, as
well as a centralized Data Coordinating Center.
RESULTS: Over 1,700 trios are part of this collection, with DNA from transformed 
cells now available through the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH).
Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule-Generic (ADOS-G) measures are available for all probands, as are
standardized IQ measures, Vineland Adaptive Behavioral Scales (VABS), the Social 
Responsiveness Scale (SRS), Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), and physical 
measures (height, weight, and head circumference). At almost every site,
additional phenotypic measures were collected, including the Broad Autism
Phenotype Questionnaire (BAPQ) and Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised (RBS-R), as 
well as the non-word repetition scale, Communication Checklist (Children's or
Adult), and Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC). Moreover, for nearly 1,000 trios, 
the Autism Genome Project Consortium (AGP) has carried out Illumina 1Â M SNP
genotyping and called copy number variation (CNV) in the samples, with data being
made available through the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Whole exome
sequencing (WES) has been carried out in over 500 probands, together with
ancestry matched controls, and this data is also available through the NIH.
Additional WES is being carried out by the Autism Sequencing Consortium (ASC),
where the focus is on sequencing complete trios. ASC sequencing for the first
1,000 samples (all from whole-blood DNA) is complete and data will be released in
2014. Data is being made available through NIH databases (database of Genotypes
and Phenotypes (dbGaP) and National Database for Autism Research (NDAR)) with DNA
released in Dist 11.0. Primary funding for the collection, genotyping, sequencing
and distribution of TASC samples was provided by Autism Speaks and the NIH,
including the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and the National Human
Genetics Research Institute (NHGRI).
CONCLUSIONS: TASC represents an important sample set that leverages expert sites.
Similar approaches, leveraging expert sites and ongoing studies, represent an
important path towards further enhancing available ASD samples.

PMCID: PMC4228819
PMID: 25392729  [PubMed]


6. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 7;9(11):e111462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111462.
eCollection 2014.

A rare duplication on chromosome 16p11.2 is identified in patients with psychosis
in Alzheimer's disease.

Zheng X(1), Demirci FY(2), Barmada MM(2), Richardson GA(3), Lopez OL(4), Sweet
RA(5), Kamboh MI(6), Feingold E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, United States of America. (2)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate
School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
United States of America. (3)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America;
Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Department of 
Neurology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; VISN 4 Mental Illness Research, Education
and Clinical Center, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
United States of America. (5)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America;
Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America; VISN 4 Mental Illness
Research, Education and Clinical Center, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (6)Department of Human
Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Psychiatry, School of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of
America; VISN 4 Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center, VA
Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Epidemiological and genetic studies suggest that schizophrenia and autism may
share genetic links. Besides common single nucleotide polymorphisms, recent data 
suggest that some rare copy number variants (CNVs) are risk factors for both
disorders. Because we have previously found that schizophrenia and psychosis in
Alzheimer's disease (AD+P) share some genetic risk, we investigated whether CNVs 
reported in schizophrenia and autism are also linked to AD+P. We searched for
CNVs associated with AD+P in 7 recurrent CNV regions that have been previously
identified across autism and schizophrenia, using the Illumina HumanOmni1-Quad
BeadChip. A chromosome 16p11.2 duplication CNV (chr16: 29,554,843-30,105,652) was
identified in 2 of 440 AD+P subjects, but not in 136 AD subjects without
psychosis, or in 593 AD subjects with intermediate psychosis status, or in 855
non-AD individuals. The frequency of this duplication CNV in AD+P (0.46%) was
similar to that reported previously in schizophrenia (0.46%). This duplication
CNV was further validated using the NanoString nCounter CNV Custom CodeSets. The 
16p11.2 duplication has been associated with developmental delay, intellectual
disability, behavioral problems, autism, schizophrenia (SCZ), and bipolar
disorder. These two AD+P patients had no personal of, nor any identified family
history of, SCZ, bipolar disorder and autism. To the best of our knowledge, our
case report is the first suggestion that 16p11.2 duplication is also linked to
AD+P. Although rare, this CNV may have an important role in the development of
psychosis.

PMCID: PMC4224411
PMID: 25379732  [PubMed - in process]


7. Psychiatr Pol. 2014 Jul-Aug;48(4):689-700.

[Molecular aspects of autism spectrum disorders].

[Article in Polish]

Lisik MZ.

Autism, also known as autism spectrum disorders (ASD), is etiologically and
clinically heterogeneous group ofneurodevelopmental disabilities. ASD affects 1% 
of child's population. The sex difference is observed with 4:1 male to female
ratio. This is descriptive diagnosis based on observation and analysis of
behavior and cognitive functions. ASD does not fit the criteria of known patterns
of inheritance. For the majority of patients polygenic model of inheritance with 
many interacting genes is the most probable. The etiology ofASD is poorly
understood. It is estimated that a specific genetic etiology can be determined in
up to 20% of individuals with ASD. Advances in microarray technology and next
generation sequencing are revealing copy variant numbers (CNV) and single
nucleotides polymorphisms (SNP) with important roles in synapse formation and
function. For families where a specific etiology has been identified, the risk of
recurrence in siblings generally depends on the etiologic diagnosis. For autism
of unknown cause, the sibling risk varies across studies but is generally
considered to range from 5 to 10%.

PMID: 25314797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1046-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3106.

Reaching a CNV milestone.

Beaudet AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics at Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1063-71.

A new study compares the copy number variants (CNVs) in 29,085 children with
developmental delay to those in 19,584 healthy controls, providing a valuable
compilation of such data. The phenotypic variability and wide range of penetrance
for these variants present societal challenges regarding how these findings might
be incorporated into newborn screening, early intervention and, perhaps, carrier 
testing and prenatal diagnosis.

PMID: 25257083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 25;9(9):e107705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107705.
eCollection 2014.

Investigation of 15q11-q13, 16p11.2 and 22q13 CNVs in autism spectrum disorder
Brazilian individuals with and without epilepsy.

Moreira DP(1), Griesi-Oliveira K(1), Bossolani-Martins AL(2), LourenÃ§o NC(1),
Takahashi VN(1), da Rocha KM(1), Moreira ES(1), Vadasz E(3), Meira JG(1), Bertola
D(4), Halloran EO(5), MagalhÃ£es TR(6), Fett-Conte AC(2), Passos-Bueno MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Pesquisas sobre o Genoma Humano e CÃ©lulas Tronco, Departamento de
GenÃ©tica e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de BiociÃªncias, Universidade de SÃ£o
Paulo, SÃ£o Paulo, Brasil. (2)Departamento de Biologia Molecular, Faculdade de
Medicina de SÃ£o JosÃ© do Rio Preto, SÃ£o JosÃ© do Rio Preto, SP, Brasil.
(3)Instituto de Psiquiatria do Hospital das ClÃ­nicas, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de SÃ£o Paulo, SÃ£o Paulo, Brasil. (4)Centro de Pesquisas sobre o
Genoma Humano e CÃ©lulas Tronco, Departamento de GenÃ©tica e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto de BiociÃªncias, Universidade de SÃ£o Paulo, SÃ£o Paulo, Brasil; Instituto
da CrianÃ§a da Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de SÃ£o Paulo, SÃ£o Paulo,
Brasil. (5)Academic Centre on Rare Diseases, School of Medicine and Medical
Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. (6)Academic Centre on Rare
Diseases, School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland; National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Copy number variations (CNVs) are an important cause of ASD and those located at 
15q11-q13, 16p11.2 and 22q13 have been reported as the most frequent. These CNVs 
exhibit variable clinical expressivity and those at 15q11-q13 and 16p11.2 also
show incomplete penetrance. In the present work, through multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis of 531 ethnically admixed 
ASD-affected Brazilian individuals, we found that the combined prevalence of the 
15q11-q13, 16p11.2 and 22q13 CNVs is 2.1% (11/531). Parental origin could be
determined in 8 of the affected individuals, and revealed that 4 of the CNVs
represent de novo events. Based on CNV prediction analysis from genome-wide SNP
arrays, the size of those CNVs ranged from 206 kb to 2.27 Mb and those at
15q11-q13 were limited to the 15q13.3 region. In addition, this analysis also
revealed 6 additional CNVs in 5 out of 11 affected individuals. Finally, we
observed that the combined prevalence of CNVs at 15q13.3 and 22q13 in
ASD-affected individuals with epilepsy (6.4%) was higher than that in
ASD-affected individuals without epilepsy (1.3%; p<0.014). Therefore, our data
show that the prevalence of CNVs at 15q13.3, 16p11.2 and 22q13 in Brazilian
ASD-affected individuals is comparable to that estimated for ASD-affected
individuals of pure or predominant European ancestry. Also, it suggests that the 
likelihood of a greater number of positive MLPA results might be found for the
15q13.3 and 22q13 regions by prioritizing ASD-affected individuals with epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC4177849
PMID: 25255310  [PubMed - in process]


10. Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1063-71. doi: 10.1038/ng.3092. Epub 2014 Sep 14.

Refining analyses of copy number variation identifies specific genes associated
with developmental delay.

Coe BP(1), Witherspoon K(1), Rosenfeld JA(2), van Bon BW(3), Vulto-van Silfhout
AT(4), Bosco P(5), Friend KL(6), Baker C(1), Buono S(5), Vissers LE(4),
Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH(4), Hoischen A(4), Pfundt R(4), Krumm N(1), Carvill GL(7),
Li D(8), Amaral D(8), Brown N(9), Lockhart PJ(10), Scheffer IE(11), Alberti A(5),
Shaw M(6), Pettinato R(5), Tervo R(12), de Leeuw N(4), Reijnders MR(4), Torchia
BS(2), Peeters H(13), O'Roak BJ(14), Fichera M(15), Hehir-Kwa JY(4), Shendure
J(1), Mefford HC(7), Haan E(16), GÃ©cz J(17), de Vries BB(4), Romano C(5), Eichler
EE(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (2)Signature Genomics Laboratories, LLC, PerkinElmer,
Inc., Spokane, Washington, USA. (3)1] Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. [2] SA Pathology, North
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (5)IRCCS (Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico) Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima,
Troina, Italy. (6)SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
(8)Representing the Autism Phenome Project, MIND Institute, University of
California, Davis, Sacramento, California, USA. (9)1] Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. [2] Barwon Child Health Unit, Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria,
Australia. (10)1] Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. [2] Murdoch Childrens
Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (11)Florey Institute, University of Melbourne,
Austin Health and Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(12)Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA. (13)1] Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. [2] Leuven Autism Research (LAuRes), Leuven, Belgium.
(14)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2]. (15)1] IRCCS (Istituto di Ricovero e
Cura a Carattere Scientifico) Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy. 
[2]. (16)1] SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. [2] School 
of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (17)1] SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. [2] Robinson Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (18)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2] Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Nov;15(11):706.
    Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1046-8.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are associated with many neurocognitive disorders;
however, these events are typically large, and the underlying causative genes are
unclear. We created an expanded CNV morbidity map from 29,085 children with
developmental delay in comparison to 19,584 healthy controls, identifying 70
significant CNVs. We resequenced 26 candidate genes in 4,716 additional cases
with developmental delay or autism and 2,193 controls. An integrated analysis of 
CNV and single-nucleotide variant (SNV) data pinpointed 10 genes enriched for
putative loss of function. Follow-up of a subset of affected individuals
identified new clinical subtypes of pediatric disease and the genes responsible
for disease-associated CNVs. These genetic changes include haploinsufficiency of 
SETBP1 associated with intellectual disability and loss of expressive language
and truncations of ZMYND11 in individuals with autism, aggression and complex
neuropsychiatric features. This combined CNV and SNV approach facilitates the
rapid discovery of new syndromes and genes involved in neuropsychiatric disease
despite extensive genetic heterogeneity.

PMCID: PMC4177294
PMID: 25217958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 19;452(2):244-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.108. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Genomic and genetic aspects of autism spectrum disorder.

Liu X(1), Takumi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (2)RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan; Japan Science and Technology
Agent (JST), Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST),
Saitama, Japan. Electronic address: toru.takumi@riken.jp.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong
genetic component. The past decade has witnessed tremendous progress in the
genetic studies of ASD. In this article, we review the accumulating literatures
on the monogenic forms of ASD and chromosomal abnormalities associated with ASD, 
the genome-wide linkage and association studies, the copy number variation (CNV) 
and the next generation sequencing (NGS) studies. With more than hundreds of
mutations being implicated, the convergent biological pathways are emerging and
the genetic landscape of ASD becomes clearer. The genetic studies provide a solid
basis for future translational study for better diagnoses, intervention and
treatment of ASD.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Neurodev Disord. 2014;6(1):34. doi: 10.1186/1866-1955-6-34. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

Copy number variation in Han Chinese individuals with autism spectrum disorder.

Gazzellone MJ(1), Zhou X(2), Lionel AC(1), Uddin M(3), Thiruvahindrapuram B(3),
Liang S(4), Sun C(4), Wang J(4), Zou M(4), Tammimies K(5), Walker S(3),
Selvanayagam T(3), Wei J(3), Wang Z(3), Wu L(4), Scherer SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology,
The Hospital for Sick Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research 
and Learning, Room 139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada ; Department of
Molecular Genetics and McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto Ontario 
M5S 1A1, Canada. (2)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and
Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan
Centre for Research and Learning, Room 139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada ;
Department of Children's and Adolescent Health, Public Health College of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, People's Republic of China ;
Heilongjiang Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150030, People's Republic of China. (3)The Centre for Applied
Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, Room
139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada. (4)Department of Children's and
Adolescent Health, Public Health College of Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150086, People's Republic of China. (5)The Centre for Applied
Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, Room
139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada ; Center of Neurodevelopmental
Disorders, Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm 113 30, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of neurodevelopmental
conditions with a demonstrated genetic etiology. Rare (<1% frequency) copy number
variations (CNVs) account for a proportion of the genetic events involved, but
the contribution of these events in non-European ASD populations has not been
well studied. Here, we report on rare CNVs detected in a cohort of individuals
with ASD of Han Chinese background.
METHODS: DNA samples were obtained from 104 ASD probands and their parents who
were recruited from Harbin, China. Samples were genotyped on the Affymetrix
CytoScan HD platform. Rare CNVs were identified by comparing data with 873
technology-matched controls from Ontario and 1,235 additional population controls
of Han Chinese ethnicity.
RESULTS: Of the probands, 8.6% had at least 1 de novo CNV (overlapping the
GIGYF2, SPRY1, 16p13.3, 16p11.2, 17p13.3-17p13.2, DMD, and NAP1L6 genes/loci).
Rare inherited CNVs affected other plausible neurodevelopmental candidate genes
including GRID2, LINGO2, and SLC39A12. A 24-kb duplication was also identified at
YWHAE, a gene previously implicated in ASD and other developmental disorders.
This duplication is observed at a similar frequency in cases and in population
controls and is likely a benign Asian-specific copy number polymorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings help define genomic features relevant to ASD in the Han
Chinese and emphasize the importance of using ancestry-matched controls in
medical genetic interpretations.

PMCID: PMC4147384
PMID: 25170348  [PubMed]


13. Curr Genet Med Rep. 2014 Jul 18;2:146-150. eCollection 2014.

Genomic Variation: Lessons Learned from Whole-Genome CNV Analysis.

Riggs ER(1), Ledbetter DH(2), Martin CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, 120 Hamm
Drive, Suite 2A, Lewisburg, PA 17837 USA. (2)Geisinger Health System, 100 N
Academy Ave., Danville, PA 17822 USA.

One of the most fundamental goals of the study of human genetics was to determine
the relationship between genomic variation and human disease. The effects of
large-scale structural variation, such as aneuploidy and other cytogenetically
visible imbalances, as well as sequence-level variation, have been studied for
several decades. However, compared to these, the impact of submicroscopic copy
number variants (CNV) has only recently been appreciated. Despite this, lessons
learned from the study of CNVs have already proven significant and broadly
applicable. From expanding the concept of normal human variation to providing
concrete examples of the utility of genomics in clinical care and challenging
notions of the genetic architecture of complex disease, CNVs have provided
valuable insights into the genomics of human health and development.

PMCID: PMC4129219
PMID: 25152847  [PubMed]


14. J Neurosci. 2014 Aug 20;34(34):11199-211. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1366-14.2014.

Opposing brain differences in 16p11.2 deletion and duplication carriers.

Qureshi AY(1), Mueller S(2), Snyder AZ(3), Mukherjee P(4), Berman JI(5), Roberts 
TP(5), Nagarajan SS(4), Spiro JE(6), Chung WK(7), Sherr EH(8), Buckner RL(9);
Simons VIP Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, Departments of Neurology and. (2)Athinoula A.
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, Ludwig Maximilians University
Munich, Institute of Clinical Radiology, Munich 81377, Germany. (3)Departments of
Neurology and Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis, St
Louis, Missouri 63110. (4)Departments of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, and.
(5)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104. (6)Simons Foundation, New York, New York 10010, and.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York 10032. (8)Neurology, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94158. (9)Harvard University, Department of Psychology and Center for 
Brain Science, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, Psychiatry, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, randy_buckner@harvard.edu.

Deletions and duplications of the recurrent ~600 kb chromosomal BP4-BP5 region of
16p11.2 are associated with a broad variety of neurodevelopmental outcomes
including autism spectrum disorder. A clue to the pathogenesis of the copy number
variant (CNV)'s effect on the brain is that the deletion is associated with a
head size increase, whereas the duplication is associated with a decrease. Here
we analyzed brain structure in a clinically ascertained group of human deletion
(N = 25) and duplication (N = 17) carriers from the Simons Variation in
Individuals Project compared with age-matched controls (N = 29 and 33,
respectively). Multiple brain measures showed increased size in deletion carriers
and reduced size in duplication carriers. The effects spanned global measures of 
intracranial volume, brain size, compartmental measures of gray matter and white 
matter, subcortical structures, and the cerebellum. Quantitatively, the largest
effect was on the thalamus, but the collective results suggest a pervasive rather
than a selective effect on the brain. Detailed analysis of cortical gray matter
revealed that cortical surface area displays a strong dose-dependent effect of
CNV (deletion > control > duplication), whereas average cortical thickness is
less affected. These results suggest that the CNV may exert its opposing
influences through mechanisms that influence early stages of embryonic brain
development.

Copyright Â© 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3411199-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4138332
PMID: 25143601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 Aug;53(8):910-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2014.04.022. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Copy number variation in obsessive-compulsive disorder and tourette syndrome: a
cross-disorder study.

McGrath LM, Yu D, Marshall C, Davis LK, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Li B, Cappi C,
Gerber G, Wolf A, Schroeder FA, Osiecki L, O'Dushlaine C, Kirby A, Illmann C,
Haddad S, Gallagher P, Fagerness JA, Barr CL, Bellodi L, Benarroch F, Bienvenu
OJ, Black DW, Bloch MH, Bruun RD, Budman CL, Camarena B, Cath DC, Cavallini MC,
Chouinard S, Coric V, Cullen B, Delorme R, Denys D, Derks EM, Dion Y, RosÃ¡rio MC,
Eapen V, Evans P, Falkai P, Fernandez TV, Garrido H, Geller D, Grabe HJ, Grados
MA, Greenberg BD, Gross-Tsur V, GrÃ¼nblatt E, Heiman GA, Hemmings SM, Herrera LD, 
Hounie AG, Jankovic J, Kennedy JL, King RA, Kurlan R, Lanzagorta N, Leboyer M,
Leckman JF, Lennertz L, Lochner C, Lowe TL, Lyon GJ, Macciardi F, Maier W,
McCracken JT, McMahon W, Murphy DL, Naarden AL, Neale BM, Nurmi E, Pakstis AJ,
Pato MT, Pato CN, Piacentini J, Pittenger C, Pollak Y, Reus VI, Richter MA,
Riddle M, Robertson MM, Rosenberg D, Rouleau GA, Ruhrmann S, Sampaio AS, Samuels 
J, Sandor P, Sheppard B, Singer HS, Smit JH, Stein DJ, Tischfield JA, Vallada H, 
Veenstra-VanderWeele J, Walitza S, Wang Y, Wendland JR, Shugart YY, Miguel EC,
Nicolini H, Oostra BA, Moessner R, Wagner M, Ruiz-Linares A, Heutink P, Nestadt
G, Freimer N, Petryshen T, Posthuma D, Jenike MA, Cox NJ, Hanna GL, Brentani H,
Scherer SW, Arnold PD, Stewart SE, Mathews CA, Knowles JA, Cook EH, Pauls DL,
Wang K, Scharf JM.

OBJECTIVE: Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and Tourette syndrome (TS) are
heritable neurodevelopmental disorders with a partially shared genetic etiology. 
This study represents the first genome-wide investigation of large (>500 kb),
rare (<1%) copy number variants (CNVs) in OCD and the largest genome-wide CNV
analysis in TS to date.
METHOD: The primary analyses used a cross-disorder design for 2,699 case patients
(1,613 ascertained for OCD, 1,086 ascertained for TS) and 1,789 controls.
Parental data facilitated a de novo analysis in 348 OCD trios.
RESULTS: Although no global CNV burden was detected in the cross-disorder
analysis or in secondary, disease-specific analyses, there was a 3.3-fold
increased burden of large deletions previously associated with other
neurodevelopmental disorders (pÂ = .09). Half of these neurodevelopmental
deletions were located in a single locus, 16p13.11 (5 case patient deletions: 0
control deletions, pÂ = .08 in the current study, pÂ = .025 compared to published
controls). Three 16p13.11 deletions were confirmed de novo, providing further
support for the etiological significance of this region. The overall OCD de novo 
rate was 1.4%, which is intermediate between published rates in controls (0.7%)
and in individuals with autism or schizophrenia (2-4%).
CONCLUSION: Several converging lines of evidence implicate 16p13.11 deletions in 
OCD, with weaker evidence for a role in TS. The trend toward increased overall
neurodevelopmental CNV burden in TS and OCD suggests that deletions previously
associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders may also contribute to these
phenotypes.

Copyright Â© 2014 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. All rights 
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4218748 [Available on 2015-08-01]
PMID: 25062598  [PubMed - in process]


16. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 15;23(24):6677-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu379. Epub 2014 Jul
23.

De novo CNVs in bipolar affective disorder and schizophrenia.

Georgieva L(1), Rees E(1), Moran JL(2), Chambert KD(2), Milanova V(3), Craddock
N(1), Purcell S(4), Sklar P(4), McCarroll S(2), Holmans P(1), O'Donovan MC(1),
Owen MJ(1), Kirov G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics,
Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, UK. (2)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry,
Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. (4)Division of Psychiatric Genomics,
Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA and
Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. (5)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics
and Genomics, Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK, kirov@cardiff.ac.uk.

An increased rate of de novo copy number variants (CNVs) has been found in
schizophrenia (SZ), autism and developmental delay. An increased rate has also
been reported in bipolar affective disorder (BD). Here, in a larger BD sample, we
aimed to replicate these findings and compare de novo CNVs between SZ and BD. We 
used Illumina microarrays to genotype 368 BD probands, 76 SZ probands and all
their parents. Copy number variants were called by PennCNV and filtered for
frequency (<1%) and size (>10 kb). Putative de novo CNVs were validated with the 
z-score algorithm, manual inspection of log R ratios (LRR) and qPCR probes. We
found 15 de novo CNVs in BD (4.1% rate) and 6 in SZ (7.9% rate). Combining
results with previous studies and using a cut-off of >100 kb, the rate of de novo
CNVs in BD was intermediate between controls and SZ: 1.5% in controls, 2.2% in BD
and 4.3% in SZ. Only the differences between SZ and BD and SZ and controls were
significant. The median size of de novo CNVs in BD (448 kb) was also intermediate
between SZ (613 kb) and controls (338 kb), but only the comparison between SZ and
controls was significant. Only one de novo CNV in BD was in a confirmed SZ locus 
(16p11.2). Sporadic or early onset cases were not more likely to have de novo
CNVs. We conclude that de novo CNVs play a smaller role in BD compared with SZ.
Patients with a positive family history can also harbour de novo mutations.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4240207
PMID: 25055870  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Child Neurol. 2015 Mar;30(3):333-8. doi: 10.1177/0883073814538669. Epub 2014
Jun 30.

Hippocampal abnormalities in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of 15q duplication 
syndromes.

Boronat S(1), Mehan WA(2), Shaaya EA(3), Thibert RL(3), Caruso P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Pediatric Neurology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Universitat AutÃ²noma
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain susboronat@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Neuroradiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Patients with 15q duplication syndromes, including isodicentric chromosome 15 and
interstitial duplications, usually present with autism spectrum disorder,
intellectual disability, and frequently epilepsy. Neuroimaging studies in these
patients are typically reported as normal, but nonspecific findings such as
thinning of the corpus callosum and increased pericerebral spaces have been
reported. A review of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of 11
individuals seen at the Massachusetts General Hospital Dup15q Center was
performed. Hippocampus morphology was specifically reviewed, as a recent
neuropathologic study has found frequent hippocampal heterotopias and dysplasias 
in these disorders. Two subjects had unilateral hippocampal sclerosis and 6 had
bilateral hippocampal malformations. Hypoplasia of the corpus callosum was
present in 2 subjects.

Â© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24985752  [PubMed - in process]


18. J Formos Med Assoc. 2014 Jul;113(7):400-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2013.01.005. Epub 
2013 Mar 13.

Copy number variation and autism: new insights and clinical implications.

Chung BH(1), Tao VQ(2), Tso WW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka 
Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Tsan Yuk
Hospital, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region; Centre of Reproduction, Development and Growth, Li
Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region. Electronic address: bhychung@hku.hk. (2)Department of
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

Genomic research can lead to discoveries of copy number variations (CNVs) which
can be a susceptibility factor for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The clinical
translation is that this can improve the care of children with ASD. Chromosome
microarray is now the first-tiered genetic investigation for ASD, with a
detection rate exceeding conventional cytogenetics and any single gene testing.
However, interpretation of the results is challenging and there is no consensus
on "what" and "how much" to disclose. In this article, we will review how CNV
studies have improved our understanding of ASD, the clinical applications, and
related counseling issues. Future direction of autism genetic research is also
discussed.

Copyright Â© 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24961180  [PubMed - in process]


19. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 Jul;53(7):761-70.e26. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2014.03.004. Epub 2014 Apr 21.

Biological overlap of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism
spectrum disorder: evidence from copy number variants.

Martin J(1), Cooper M(2), Hamshere ML(2), Pocklington A(2), Scherer SW(3), Kent
L(4), Gill M(5), Owen MJ(2), Williams N(2), O'Donovan MC(2), Thapar A(2), Holmans
P(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University School of
Medicine, UK. Electronic address: martinjm1@cardiff.ac.uk. (2)MRC Centre for
Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Psychological Medicine and
Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University School of Medicine, UK. (3)Hospital
for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Bute Medical
School, University of St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland. (5)Trinity Centre for Health
Sciences, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) often co-occur and share genetic risks. The aim of this analysis
was to determine more broadly whether ADHD and ASD share biological
underpinnings.
METHOD: We compared copy number variant (CNV) data from 727 children with ADHD
and 5,081 population controls to data from 996 individuals with ASD and an
independent set of 1,287 controls. Using pathway analyses, we investigated
whether CNVs observed in individuals with ADHD have an impact on genes in the
same biological pathways as on those observed in individuals with ASD.
RESULTS: The results suggest that the biological pathways affected by CNVs in
ADHD overlap with those affected by CNVs in ASD more than would be expected by
chance. Moreover, this was true even when specific CNV regions common to both
disorders were excluded from the analysis. After correction for multiple testing,
genes involved in 3 biological processes (nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
signalling pathway, cell division, and response to drug) showed significant
enrichment for case CNV hits in the combined ADHD and ASD sample.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate the presence of significant
overlap of shared biological processes disrupted by large rare CNVs in children
with these 2 neurodevelopmental conditions.

Copyright Â© 2014 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4074351
PMID: 24954825  [PubMed - in process]


20. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 May 23;7:34. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-34. eCollection 2014.

Performance of chromosomal microarray for patients with intellectual
disabilities/developmental delay, autism, and multiple congenital anomalies in a 
Chinese cohort.

Chong WW(1), Lo IF(2), Lam ST(2), Wang CC(1), Luk HM(2), Leung TY(1), Choy KW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China ; Prenatal genetic diagnosis laboratory, Prince of Wales
Hospital, 30-32 Ngan Shing Street, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China. (2)Clinical
Genetic Service, Department of Health, Hong Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China ; Prenatal genetic diagnosis laboratory, Prince of Wales Hospital, 30-32
Ngan Shing Street, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China ; CUHK-Shenzhen Research
Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China ; Joint Centre
with Utrecht University-Genetic Core, School of Biomedical Science, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is currently the first-tier genetic test
for patients with idiopathic neuropsychiatric diseases in many countries. Its
improved diagnostic yield over karyotyping and other molecular testing
facilitates the identification of the underlying causes of neuropsychiatric
diseases. In this study, we applied oligonucleotide array comparative genomic
hybridization as the molecular genetic test in a Chinese cohort of children with 
DD/ID, autism or MCA.
RESULTS: CMA identified 7 clinically significant microduplications and 17
microdeletions in 19.0% (20/105) patients, with size of aberrant regions ranging 
from 11Â kb to 10.7Â Mb. Fourteen of the pathogenic copy number variant (CNV)
detected corresponded to well known microdeletion or microduplication syndromes. 
Four overlapped with critical regions of recently identified genomic syndromes.
We also identified a rare de novo 2.3Â Mb deletion at 8p21.3-21.2 as a pathogenic 
submicroscopic CNV. We also identified two novel CNVs, one at Xq28 and the other 
at 12q21.31-q21.33, in two patients (1.9%) with unclear clinical significance.
Overall, the detection rate of CMA is comparable to figures previously reported
for accurately detect submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances and pathogenic CNVs
except mosaicism, balanced translocation and inversion.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provided further evidence of an increased diagnostic
yield of CMA and supported its use as a first line diagnostic tool for Chinese
individuals with DD/ID, ASD, and MCA.

PMCID: PMC4055236
PMID: 24926319  [PubMed]


21. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Jun 5;94(6):870-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.05.004.

Transcriptional consequences of 16p11.2 deletion and duplication in mouse cortex 
and multiplex autism families.

Blumenthal I(1), Ragavendran A(1), Erdin S(1), Klei L(2), Sugathan A(1), Guide
JR(1), Manavalan P(1), Zhou JQ(3), Wheeler VC(1), Levin JZ(4), Ernst C(5), Roeder
K(3), Devlin B(2), Gusella JF(6), Talkowski ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics
Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (3)Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (4)Program in Medical and Population
Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Douglas Hospital Research
Institute, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada. (6)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and
Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Program in
Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA 02141, USA; Departments of Neurology, Genetics, Psychiatry, and Pathology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02141, USA.
(7)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics
Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA; Departments of Neurology, Genetics,
Psychiatry, and Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02141, USA. Electronic address:
talkowski@chgr.mgh.harvard.edu.

Reciprocal copy-number variation (CNV) of a 593 kb region of 16p11.2 is a common 
genetic cause of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), yet it is not completely
penetrant and can manifest in a wide array of phenotypes. To explore its
molecular consequences, we performed RNA sequencing of cerebral cortex from mouse
models with CNV of the syntenic 7qF3 region and lymphoblast lines from 34 members
of 7 multiplex ASD-affected families harboring the 16p11.2 CNV. Expression of all
genes in the CNV region correlated well with their DNA copy number, with no
evidence of dosage compensation. We observed effects on gene expression outside
the CNV region, including apparent positional effects in cis and in trans at
genomic segments with evidence of physical interaction in Hi-C chromosome
conformation data. One of the most significant positional effects was telomeric
to the 16p11.2 CNV and includes the previously described "distal" 16p11.2
microdeletion. Overall, 16p11.2 CNV was associated with altered expression of
genes and networks that converge on multiple hypotheses of ASD pathogenesis,
including synaptic function (e.g., NRXN1, NRXN3), chromatin modification (e.g.,
CHD8, EHMT1, MECP2), transcriptional regulation (e.g., TCF4, SATB2), and
intellectual disability (e.g., FMR1, CEP290). However, there were differences
between tissues and species, with the strongest effects being consistently within
the CNV region itself. Our analyses suggest that through a combination of
indirect regulatory effects and direct effects on nuclear architecture,
alteration of 16p11.2 genes disrupts expression networks that involve other genes
and pathways known to contribute to ASD, suggesting an overlap in mechanisms of
pathogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4121471
PMID: 24906019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Med Genet. 2014 May 29;15:62. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-15-62.

A genomic copy number variant analysis implicates the MBD5 and HNRNPU genes in
Chinese children with infantile spasms and expands the clinical spectrum of
2q23.1 deletion.

Du X, An Y, Yu L, Liu R, Qin Y, Guo X, Sun D, Zhou S, Wu B, Jiang YH(1), Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 399 Wan Yuan
Road, Shanghai 201102, China. yong-hui.jiang@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Infantile spasms (IS) is a specific type of epileptic encephalopathy 
associated with severe developmental disabilities. Genetic factors are strongly
implicated in IS, however, the exact genetic defects remain unknown in the
majority of cases. Rare mutations in a single gene or in copy number variants
(CNVs) have been implicated in IS of children in Western countries. The objective
of this study was to dissect the role of copy number variations in Chinese
children with infantile spasms.
METHODS: We used the Agilent Human Genome CGH microarray 180 K for genome-wide
detection of CNVs. Real-time qPCR was used to validate the CNVs. We performed
genomic and medical annotations for individual CNVs to determine the
pathogenicity of CNVs related to IS.
RESULTS: We report herein the first genome-wide CNV analysis in children with IS,
detecting a total of 14 CNVs in a cohort of 47 Chinese children with IS. Four
CNVs (4/47â=â8.5%) (1q21.1 gain; 1q44, 2q31.1, and 17p13 loss) are considered to 
be pathogenic. The CNV loss at 17p13.3 contains PAFAH1B1 (LIS1), a causative gene
for lissencephaly. Although the CNVs at 1q21.1, 1q44, and 2q23.1 have been
previously implicated in a wide spectrum of clinical features including autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) and generalized seizure, our study is the first report
identifying them in individuals with a primary diagnosis of IS. The CNV loss in
the 1q44 region contains HNRNPU, a strong candidate gene recently suggested in IS
by the whole exome sequencing of children with IS. The CNV loss at 2q23.1
includes MBD5, a methyl-DNA binding protein that is a causative gene of ASD and a
candidate gene for epileptic encephalopathy. We also report a distinct clinical
presentation of IS, microcephaly, intellectual disability, and absent hallux in a
case with the 2q23.1 deletion.
CONCLUSION: Our findings strongly support the role of CNVs in infantile spasms
and expand the clinical spectrum associate with 2q23.1 deletion. In particular,
our study implicates the HNRNPU and MBD5 genes in Chinese children with IS. Our
study also supports that the molecular mechanisms of infantile spasms appear
conserved among different ethnic backgrounds.

PMCID: PMC4061518
PMID: 24885232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1168:117-55. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0847-9_8.

Chromosome microarrays in diagnostic testing: interpreting the genomic data.

Peters GB(1), Pertile MD.

Author information: 
(1)Sydney Genome Diagnostics, The Childrens Hospital at Westmead, Cnr Hawkesbury 
Road and Hainsworth Street, Westmead, NSW, 2145, Australia,
greg.peters@health.nsw.gov.au.

DNA-based Chromosome MicroArrays (CMAs) are now well established as diagnostic
tools in clinical genetics laboratories. Over the last decade, the primary
application of CMAs has been the genome-wide detection of a particular class of
mutation known as copy number variants (CNVs). Since 2010, CMA testing has been
recommended as a first-tier test for detection of CNVs associated with
intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and/or multiple congenital
anomaliesâ¦in the post-natal setting. CNVs are now regarded as pathogenic in 14-18
% of patients referred for these (and related) disorders.Through consideration of
clinical examples, and several microarray platforms, we attempt to provide an
appreciation of microarray diagnostics, from the initial inspection of the
microarray data, to the composing of the patient report. In CMA data
interpretation, a major challenge comes from the high frequency of clinically
irrelevant CNVs observed within "patient" and "normal" populations. As might be
predicted, the more common and clinically insignificant CNVs tend to be the
smaller ones <100 kb in length, involving few or no known genes. However, this
relationship is not at all straightforward: CNV length and gene content are only 
very imperfect indicators of CNV pathogenicity. Presently, there are no reliable 
means of separating, a priori, the benign from the pathological CNV classes.This 
chapter also considers sources of technical "noise" within CMA data sets. Some
level of noise is inevitable in diagnostic genomics, given the very large number 
of data points generated in any one test. Noise further limits CMA resolution,
and some miscalling of CNVs is unavoidable. In this, there is no ideal solution, 
but various strategies for handling noise are available. Even without solutions, 
consideration of these diagnostic problems per se is informative, as they afford 
critical insights into the biological and technical underpinnings of CNV
discovery. These are indispensable to any clinician or scientist practising
within the field of genome diagnostics.

PMID: 24870134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Jul;165B(5):391-8. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32243. Epub 2014 May 19.

Association of CDH11 with non-syndromic ASD.

Crepel A(1), De Wolf V, Brison N, Ceulemans B, Walleghem D, Peuteman G,
Lambrechts D, Steyaert J, Noens I, Devriendt K, Peeters H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium; Leuven Autism Research (LAuRes), Leuven, Belgium.

We report a sporadic patient with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), mild
intellectual disability and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with 
a de novo partial deletion of CADHERIN 11 (CDH11). The deletion is associated
with one of the breakpoints of a de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement
46,XY,t(3;16;5)(q29;q22;q15)inv4(p14;q21)ins(4;5)(q21;q14.3q15). Cadherins are
cell adhesion molecules involved in synaptic plasticity. Since genetic evidence
points towards a role for cadherins in ASD, we studied the possible contribution 
of CDH11 to ASD. A case-control association study for 14 SNP variants in 519 ASD 
cases and 1,192 controls showed significant overrepresentation of rs7187376C/C
genotypes in the patient group [Pâ=â0.0049 (Chi-squareâ=â7.90 1âdf) and O.R. 3.88
C.I.â=â1.403-10.733]. There was no association for C/T versus T/T [Pâ=â0.6772
(Chi-squareâ=â0.17 1âdf)] nor was there association at the allelic level
[Pâ=â0.4373 (Chi-squareâ=â0.6 1âdf)]. In addition to the association of common
variants in CDH11 with ASD, we studied the possible contribution of rare variants
by sequencing CDH11 in 247 patients, and found three novel variants in the coding
region of CDH1, of which two variants were unlikely to be causal. Targeted CNV
screening in these 247 patients did not reveal copy number variation in CDH11. In
conclusion, the data provide evidence for the involvement of CDH11 in ASD which
is consistent with the association of other cadherins with ASD and
neuropsychiatric diseases.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24839052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Autism Res. 2014 Jun;7(3):355-62. doi: 10.1002/aur.1378. Epub 2014 May 12.

Modest impact on risk for autism spectrum disorder of rare copy number variants
at 15q11.2, specifically breakpoints 1 to 2.

Chaste P(1), Sanders SJ, Mohan KN, Klei L, Song Y, Murtha MT, Hus V, Lowe JK,
Willsey AJ, Moreno-De-Luca D, Yu TW, Fombonne E, Geschwind D, Grice DE, Ledbetter
DH, Lord C, Mane SM, Martin DM, Morrow EM, Walsh CA, Sutcliffe JS, State MW,
Martin CL, Devlin B, Beaudet AL, Cook EH Jr, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; FondaMental Foundation, CrÃ©teil, France.

The proximal region of chromosome 15 is one of the genomic hotspots for copy
number variants (CNVs). Among the rearrangements observed in this region, CNVs
from the interval between the common breakpoints 1 and 2 (BP1 and BP2) have been 
reported cosegregating with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Although evidence
supporting an association between BP1-BP2 CNVs and autism accumulates, the
magnitude of the effect of BP1-BP2 CNVs remains elusive, posing a great challenge
to recurrence-risk counseling. To gain further insight into their pathogenicity
for ASD, we estimated the penetrance of the BP1-BP2 CNVs for ASD as well as their
effects on ASD-related phenotypes in a well-characterized ASD sample (nâ=â2525
families). Transmission disequilibrium test revealed significant preferential
transmission only for the duplicated chromosome in probands (20T:9NT). The
penetrance of the BP1-BP2 CNVs for ASD was low, conferring additional risks of
0.3% (deletion) and 0.8% (duplication). Stepwise regression analyses suggest a
greater effect of the CNVs on ASD-related phenotype in males and when maternally 
inherited. Taken together, the results are consistent with BP1-BP2 CNVs as risk
factors for autism. However, their effect is modest, more akin to that seen for
common variants. To be consistent with the current American College of Medical
Genetics guidelines for interpretation of postnatal CNV, the BP1-BP2 deletion and
duplication CNVs would probably best be classified as variants of uncertain
significance (VOUS): they appear to have an impact on risk, but one so modest
that these CNVs do not merit pathogenic status.

Â© 2014 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24821083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Aug;164A(8):1991-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36602. Epub 2014
May 9.

Intragenic rearrangements in X-linked intellectual deficiency: results of a-CGH
in a series of 54 patients and identification of TRPC5 and KLHL15 as potential
XLID genes.

Mignon-Ravix C(1), Cacciagli P, Choucair N, Popovici C, Missirian C, Milh M,
MÃ©garbanÃ© A, Busa T, Julia S, Girard N, Badens C, Sigaudy S, Philip N, Villard L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR_S 910, Marseille, France; Aix Marseille UniversitÃ©, GMGF,
Marseille, France.

High-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) enables the
detection of intragenic rearrangements, such as single exon deletion or
duplication. This approach can lead to the identification of new disease genes.
We report on the analysis of 54 male patients presenting with intellectual
deficiency (ID) and a family history suggesting X-linked (XL) inheritance or
maternal skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI), using a home-made
X-chromosome-specific microarray covering the whole human X-chromosome at high
resolution. The majority of patients had whole genome array-CGH prior to the
selection and we did not include large rearrangements such as MECP2 and FMR1
duplications. We identified four rearrangements considered as causative or
potentially pathogenic, corresponding to a detection rate of 8%. Two CNVs
affected known XLID genes and were therefore considered as causative (IL1RAPL1
and OPHN1 intragenic deletions). Two new CNVs were considered as potentially
pathogenic as they affected interesting candidates for ID. The first CNV is a
deletion of the first exon of the TRPC5 gene, encoding a cation channel
implicated in dendrite growth and patterning, in a child presenting with ID and
an autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The second CNV is a partial deletion of
KLHL15, in a patient with severe ID, epilepsy, and anomalies of cortical
development. In both cases, in spite of strong arguments for clinical relevance, 
we were not able at this stage to confirm pathogenicity of the mutations, and the
causality of the variants identified in XLID remains to be confirmed.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24817631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Ann Neurol. 2014 Jun;75(6):943-58. doi: 10.1002/ana.24178. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Copy number variation plays an important role in clinical epilepsy.

Olson H(1), Shen Y, Avallone J, Sheidley BR, Pinsky R, Bergin AM, Berry GT, Duffy
FH, Eksioglu Y, Harris DJ, Hisama FM, Ho E, Irons M, Jacobsen CM, James P,
Kothare S, Khwaja O, Lipton J, Loddenkemper T, Markowitz J, Maski K, Megerian JT,
Neilan E, Raffalli PC, Robbins M, Roberts A, Roe E, Rollins C, Sahin M, Sarco D, 
Schonwald A, Smith SE, Soul J, Stoler JM, Takeoka M, Tan WH, Torres AR, Tsai P,
Urion DK, Weissman L, Wolff R, Wu BL, Miller DT, Poduri A.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Genetics Program, Division of Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology
and Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital,
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2014 Sep;10(9):490-1.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of copy number abnormalities detectable using
chromosomal microarray (CMA) testing in patients with epilepsy at a tertiary care
center.
METHODS: We identified patients with International Classification of Diseases,
ninth revision (ICD-9) codes for epilepsy or seizures and clinical CMA testing
performed between October 2006 and February 2011 at Boston Children's Hospital.
We reviewed medical records and included patients who met criteria for epilepsy. 
We phenotypically characterized patients with epilepsy-associated abnormalities
on CMA.
RESULTS: Of 973 patients who had CMA and ICD-9 codes for epilepsy or seizures,
805 patients satisfied criteria for epilepsy. We observed 437 copy number
variants (CNVs) in 323 patients (1-4 per patient), including 185 (42%) deletions 
and 252 (58%) duplications. Forty (9%) were confirmed de novo, 186 (43%) were
inherited, and parental data were unavailable for 211 (48%). Excluding full
chromosome trisomies, CNV size ranged from 18kb to 142Mb, and 34% were >500kb. In
at least 40 cases (5%), the epilepsy phenotype was explained by a CNV, including 
29 patients with epilepsy-associated syndromes and 11 with likely
disease-associated CNVs involving epilepsy genes or "hotspots." We observed
numerous recurrent CNVs including 10 involving loss or gain of Xp22.31, a region 
described in patients with and without epilepsy.
INTERPRETATION: Copy number abnormalities play an important role in patients with
epilepsy. Because the diagnostic yield of CMA for epilepsy patients is similar to
the yield in autism spectrum disorders and in prenatal diagnosis, for which
published guidelines recommend testing with CMA, we recommend the implementation 
of CMA in the evaluation of unexplained epilepsy.

Â© 2014 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 24811917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Jun;165B(4):337-44. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32236. Epub 2014 May 8.

Adult neuropsychiatric expression and familial segregation of 2q13 duplications.

Costain G(1), Lionel AC, Fu F, Stavropoulos DJ, Gazzellone MJ, Marshall CR,
Scherer SW, Bassett AS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Research Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

New genomic disorders associated with large, rare, recurrent copy number
variations (CNVs) are being discovered at a rapid pace. Detailed phenotyping and 
family studies are rare, however, as are data on adult phenotypic expression.
Duplications at 2q13 were recently identified as risk factors for developmental
delay/autism and reported in the prenatal setting, yet few individuals (all
children) have been extensively phenotyped. During a genome-wide CNV study of
schizophrenia, we identified two unrelated probands with 2q13 duplications. In
this study, detailed phenotyping and genotyping using high-resolution microarrays
was performed for 12 individuals across their two families. 2q13 duplications
were present in six adults, and co-segregated with clinically significant
later-onset neuropsychiatric disorders. Convergent lines of evidence implicated
GABAminergic dysfunction. Analysis of the genic content revealed promising
candidates for neuropsychiatric disease, including BCL2L11, ANAPC1, and MERTK.
Intrafamilial genetic heterogeneity and "second hits" in one family may have been
the consequence of assortative mating. Clinical genetic testing for the 2q13
duplication and the associated genetic counseling was well received. In summary, 
large rare 2q13 duplications appear to be associated with variable adult
neuropsychiatric and other expression. The findings represent progress toward
clinical translation of research results in schizophrenia. There are implications
for other emerging genomic disorders where there is interest in lifelong
expression.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24807792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 30;34(18):6214-23. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4495-13.2014.

Aberrant white matter microstructure in children with 16p11.2 deletions.

Owen JP(1), Chang YS, Pojman NJ, Bukshpun P, Wakahiro ML, Marco EJ, Berman JI,
Spiro JE, Chung WK, Buckner RL, Roberts TP, Nagarajan SS, Sherr EH, Mukherjee P; 
Simons VIP Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94107, Program in Bioengineering, Department
of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 
94158, Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, Simons Foundation, New York, New York 10010,
Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York 10032, and Center for Brain Science, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

Copy number variants (CNVs) of the chromosomal locus 16p11.2, consisting of
either deletions or duplications, have been implicated in autism, schizophrenia, 
epilepsy, and other neuropsychiatric disorders. Since abnormal white matter
microstructure can be seen in these more broadly defined clinical disorders, we
used diffusion magnetic resonance imaging and tract-based spatial statistics to
investigate white matter microstructural integrity in human children with 16p11.2
deletions. We show that deletion carriers, compared with typically developing
matched controls, have increased axial diffusivity (AD) in many major central
white matter tracts, including the anterior corpus callosum as well as bilateral 
internal and external capsules. Higher AD correlated with lower nonverbal IQ in
the deletion carriers, but not controls. Increases in fractional anisotropy and
mean diffusivity were also found in some of the same tracts with elevated AD.
Closer examination with neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging
revealed that fiber orientation dispersion was decreased in some central white
matter tracts. Notably, these alterations of white matter are unlike
microstructural differences reported for any other neurodevelopmental disorders, 
including autism spectrum disorders that have phenotypic overlap with the
deletion carriers. These findings suggest that deletion of the 16p11.2 locus is
associated with a unique widespread pattern of aberrant white matter
microstructure that may underlie the impaired cognition characteristic of this
CNV.

PMID: 24790192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Jul;19(7):762-73. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.40. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

Copy number variation in schizophrenia in Sweden.

Szatkiewicz JP(1), O'Dushlaine C(2), Chen G(1), Chambert K(2), Moran JL(2), Neale
BM(2), Fromer M(3), Ruderfer D(3), Akterin S(4), Bergen SE(5), KÃ¤hler A(4),
Magnusson PK(4), Kim Y(1), Crowley JJ(1), Rees E(6), Kirov G(6), O'Donovan MC(6),
Owen MJ(6), Walters J(6), Scolnick E(2), Sklar P(3), Purcell S(7), Hultman CM(4),
McCarroll SA(8), Sullivan PF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, NY, USA. (4)Department of Medical Epidemiology, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. (5)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] Department of Medical Epidemiology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (6)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric
Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical
Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. (7)1] Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] 
Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(8)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. (9)1] Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA [2] Department of Medical Epidemiology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a highly heritable neuropsychiatric disorder of complex
genetic etiology. Previous genome-wide surveys have revealed a greater burden of 
large, rare copy number variations (CNVs) in SCZ cases and identified multiple
rare recurrent CNVs that increase risk of SCZ although with incomplete penetrance
and pleiotropic effects. Identification of additional recurrent CNVs and
biological pathways enriched for SCZ CNVs requires greater sample sizes. We
conducted a genome-wide survey for CNVs associated with SCZ using a Swedish
national sample (4719 cases and 5917 controls). High-confidence CNV calls were
generated using genotyping array intensity data, and their effect on risk of SCZ 
was measured. Our data confirm increased burden of large, rare CNVs in SCZ cases 
as well as significant associations for recurrent 16p11.2 duplications, 22q11.2
deletions and 3q29 deletions. We report a novel association for 17q12
duplications (odds ratio=4.16, P=0.018), previously associated with autism and
mental retardation but not SCZ. Intriguingly, gene set association analyses
implicate biological pathways previously associated with SCZ through common
variation and exome sequencing (calcium channel signaling and binding partners of
the fragile X mental retardation protein). We found significantly increased
burden of the largest CNVs (>500âkb) in genes present in the postsynaptic
density, in genomic regions implicated via SCZ genome-wide association studies
and in gene products localized to mitochondria and cytoplasm. Our findings
suggest that multiple lines of genomic inquiry--genome-wide screens for CNVs,
common variation and exonic variation--are converging on similar sets of pathways
and/or genes.

PMCID: PMC4271733
PMID: 24776740  [PubMed - in process]


31. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 May 1;94(5):677-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.018. Epub
2014 Apr 24.

Convergence of genes and cellular pathways dysregulated in autism spectrum
disorders.

Pinto D, Delaby E, Merico D, Barbosa M, Merikangas A, Klei L, Thiruvahindrapuram 
B, Xu X, Ziman R, Wang Z, Vorstman JA, Thompson A, Regan R, Pilorge M, Pellecchia
G, Pagnamenta AT, Oliveira B, Marshall CR, Magalhaes TR, Lowe JK, Howe JL,
Griswold AJ, Gilbert J, Duketis E, Dombroski BA, De Jonge MV, Cuccaro M, Crawford
EL, Correia CT, Conroy J, ConceiÃ§Ã£o IC, Chiocchetti AG, Casey JP, Cai G, Cabrol
C, Bolshakova N, Bacchelli E, Anney R, Gallinger S, Cotterchio M, Casey G,
Zwaigenbaum L, Wittemeyer K, Wing K, Wallace S, van Engeland H, Tryfon A, Thomson
S, Soorya L, RogÃ© B, Roberts W, Poustka F, Mouga S, Minshew N, McInnes LA, McGrew
SG, Lord C, Leboyer M, Le Couteur AS, Kolevzon A, JimÃ©nez GonzÃ¡lez P, Jacob S,
Holt R, Guter S, Green J, Green A, Gillberg C, Fernandez BA, Duque F, Delorme R, 
Dawson G, Chaste P, CafÃ© C, Brennan S, Bourgeron T, Bolton PF, BÃ¶lte S, Bernier
R, Baird G, Bailey AJ, Anagnostou E, Almeida J, Wijsman EM, Vieland VJ, Vicente
AM, Schellenberg GD, Pericak-Vance M, Paterson AD, Parr JR, Oliveira G,
Nurnberger JI, Monaco AP, Maestrini E, Klauck SM, Hakonarson H, Haines JL,
Geschwind DH, Freitag CM, Folstein SE, Ennis S, Coon H, Battaglia A, Szatmari P, 
Sutcliffe JS, Hallmayer J, Gill M, Cook EH, Buxbaum JD, Devlin B, Gallagher L,
Betancur C, Scherer SW.

Rare copy-number variation (CNV) is an important source of risk for autism
spectrum disorders (ASDs). We analyzed 2,446 ASD-affected families and confirmed 
an excess of genic deletions and duplications in affected versus control groups
(1.41-fold, p = 1.0Â Ã 10(-5)) and an increase in affected subjects carrying
exonic pathogenic CNVs overlapping known loci associated with dominant or
X-linked ASD and intellectual disability (odds ratio = 12.62, p = 2.7Â Ã 10(-15), 
â¼3% of ASD subjects). Pathogenic CNVs, often showing variable expressivity,
included rare de novo and inherited events at 36 loci, implicating ASD-associated
genes (CHD2, HDAC4, and GDI1) previously linked to other neurodevelopmental
disorders, as well as other genes such as SETD5, MIR137, and HDAC9. Consistent
with hypothesized gender-specific modulators, females with ASD were more likely
to have highly penetrant CNVs (p = 0.017) and were also overrepresented among
subjects with fragile X syndrome protein targets (p = 0.02). Genes affected by de
novo CNVs and/or loss-of-function single-nucleotide variants converged on
networks related to neuronal signaling and development, synapse function, and
chromatin regulation.

Copyright Â© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4067558
PMID: 24768552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Apr 24;55(5):3258-64. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-14339.

Gene-rich large deletions are overrepresented in POAG patients of Indian and
Caucasian origins.

Kaurani L(1), Vishal M(2), Kumar D(3), Sharma A(4), Mehani B(1), Sharma C(5),
Chakraborty S(6), Jha P(1), Ray J(7), Sen A(8), Dash D(3), Ray K(9), Mukhopadhyay
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, Delhi, India. (2)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, CSIR-Institute of
Genomics and Integrative Biology, Delhi, India Molecular and Human Genetics
Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India. (3)G. N.
Ramachandran Knowledge Centre for Genome Informatics, CSIR-Institute of Genomics 
and Integrative Biology, Delhi, India. (4)Genomics and Molecular Medicine,
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Delhi, India Academy of
Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. (5)Mathematics
Department, Shiv Nadar University, Uttar Pradesh, India. (6)Molecular and Human
Genetics Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India S.
N. Pradhan Centre for Neurosciences, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India.
(7)S. N. Pradhan Centre for Neurosciences, University of Calcutta, Kolkata,
India. (8)Dristi Pradip, Kolkata, India. (9)Molecular and Human Genetics
Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India Academy of
Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India.

PURPOSE: Large copy number variations (CNV) can contribute to increased burden
for neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we analyzed the genome-wide burden
of large CNVs > 100 kb in primary open angle glaucoma (POAG), a neurodegenerative
disease of the eye that is the largest cause of irreversible blindness.
METHODS: Genome-wide analysis of CNVs > 100 kb were analyzed in a total of 1720
individuals, including an Indian cohort (347 POAG cases and 345 controls) and a
Caucasian cohort (624 cases and 404 controls). All the CNV data were obtained
from experiments performed on Illumina 660W-Quad (infinium) arrays.
RESULTS: We observed that for both the populations CNVs > 1 Mb was significantly 
enriched for gene-rich regions unique to the POAG cases (P < 10(-11)). In the
Indian cohort CNVs > 1 Mb (39 calls) in patients influenced 125 genes while in
controls 31 such CNVs influenced only 5 genes with no overlap. In both cohorts we
observed 1.9-fold gene enrichment in patients for deletions compared to
duplications, while such a bias was not observed in controls (0.3-fold). Overall 
duplications > 1 Mb were more than deletions (Del/Dup = 0.82) confirming that the
enrichment of gene-rich deletions in patients was associated with the disease. Of
the 39 CNVs > 1 Mb from Indian patients, 28 (72%) also were implicated in other
neurodegenerative disorders, like autism, schizophrenia, sensorineural hearing
loss, and so forth. We found one large duplication encompassing CNTN4 gene in
Indian and Caucasian POAG patients that was absent in the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, our study is the first report on large CNV bias
for gene-rich regions in glaucomatous neurodegeneration, implicating its impact
across populations of contrasting ethnicities. We identified CNTN4 as a novel
candidate gene for POAG.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4039367
PMID: 24764060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Autism. 2014 Apr 10;5(1):28. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-28.

Recurrent duplications of the annexin A1 gene (ANXA1) in autism spectrum
disorders.

Correia CT, ConceiÃ§Ã£o IC, Oliveira B, Coelho J, Sousa I, Sequeira AF, Almeida J, 
CafÃ© C, Duque F, Mouga S, Roberts W, Gao K, Lowe JK, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Walker
S, Marshall CR, Pinto D, Nurnberger JI, Scherer SW, Geschwind DH, Oliveira G,
Vicente AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de SaÃºde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon 1649-016, Portugal.
astrid.vicente@insa.min-saude.pt.

BACKGROUND: Validating the potential pathogenicity of copy number variants (CNVs)
identified in genome-wide studies of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) requires
detailed assessment of case/control frequencies, inheritance patterns, clinical
correlations, and functional impact. Here, we characterize a small recurrent
duplication in the annexin A1 (ANXA1) gene, identified by the Autism Genome
Project (AGP) study.
METHODS: From the AGP CNV genomic screen in 2,147 ASD individuals, we selected
for characterization an ANXA1 gene duplication that was absent in 4,964
population-based controls. We further screened the duplication in a follow-up
sample including 1,496 patients and 410 controls, and evaluated clinical
correlations and family segregation. Sequencing of exonic/downstream ANXA1
regions was performed in 490 ASD patients for identification of additional
variants.
RESULTS: The ANXA1 duplication, overlapping the last four exons and 3'UTR region,
had an overall prevalence of 11/3,643 (0.30%) in unrelated ASD patients but was
not identified in 5,374 controls. Duplication carriers presented no distinctive
clinical phenotype. Family analysis showed neuropsychiatric deficits and ASD
traits in multiple relatives carrying the duplication, suggestive of a complex
genetic inheritance. Sequencing of exonic regions and the 3'UTR identified 11
novel changes, but no obvious variants with clinical significance.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide multilevel evidence for a role of ANXA1 in ASD etiology. 
Given its important role as mediator of glucocorticoid function in a wide variety
of brain processes, including neuroprotection, apoptosis, and control of the
neuroendocrine system, the results add ANXA1 to the growing list of rare
candidate genetic etiological factors for ASD.

PMCID: PMC4098665
PMID: 24720851  [PubMed]


34. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Aug;164A(8):1916-22. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36554. Epub 2014 
Apr 8.

Phenotypic features in patients with 15q11.2(BP1-BP2) deletion: further
delineation of an emerging syndrome.

Cafferkey M(1), Ahn JW, Flinter F, Ogilvie C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College, London, UK.

15q11.2 deletions flanked by BP1 and BP2 of the Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome
region have recently been linked to a range of neurodevelopment disorders
including intellectual disability, speech and language delay, motor delay, autism
spectrum disorders, epilepsy, and schizophrenia. Array CGH analysis of 14,605
patients referred for diagnostic cytogenetic testing found that 83 patients
(0.57%) carried the 15q11.2(BP1-BP2) deletion. Phenotypic frequencies in the
deleted cohort (nâ=â83) were compared with frequencies in the non-deleted cohort 
(nâ=â14,522); developmental delay, motor delay, and speech and language delay
were all more prevalent in the deleted cohort. Notably, motor delay was
significantly more common (ORâ=â6.37). These data indicate that developmental
delay, motor delay, and speech and language delay are common clinical features
associated with this deletion, providing substantial evidence to support this CNV
as a susceptibility locus for a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders. Â© 2014 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24715682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Transl Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 25;4:e374. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.16.

The autism and schizophrenia associated gene CYFIP1 is critical for the
maintenance of dendritic complexity and the stabilization of mature spines.

Pathania M(1), Davenport EC(1), Muir J(1), Sheehan DF(1), LÃ³pez-DomÃ©nech G(1),
Kittler JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology, University College
London, London, UK.

Copy number variation (CNV) at the 15q11.2 region has been identified as a
significant risk locus for neurological and neuropsychiatric conditions such as
schizophrenia (SCZ) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, the individual
roles for genes at this locus in nervous system development, function and
connectivity remain poorly understood. Haploinsufficiency of one gene in this
region, Cyfip1, may provide a model for 15q11.2 CNV-associated neuropsychiatric
phenotypes. Here we show that altering CYFIP1 expression levels in neurons both
in vitro and in vivo influences dendritic complexity, spine morphology, spine
actin dynamics and synaptic Î±-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA) receptor lateral diffusion. CYFIP1 is highly enriched at synapses and its 
overexpression in vitro leads to increased dendritic complexity. Neurons derived 
from Cyfip1 heterozygous animals on the other hand, possess reduced dendritic
complexity, increased mobile F-actin and enhanced GluA2-containing AMPA receptor 
mobility at synapses. Interestingly, Cyfip1 overexpression or haploinsufficiency 
increased immature spine number, whereas activity-dependent changes in spine
volume were occluded in Cyfip1 haploinsufficient neurons. In vivo, Cyfip1
heterozygous animals exhibited deficits in dendritic complexity as well as an
altered ratio of immature-to-mature spines in hippocampal CA1 neurons. In
summary, we provide evidence that dysregulation of CYFIP1 expression levels leads
to pathological changes in CNS maturation and neuronal connectivity, both of
which may contribute to the development of the neurological symptoms seen in ASD 
and SCZ.

PMCID: PMC3966042
PMID: 24667445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 25;9(3):e90947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090947. eCollection
2014.

Assessing the impact of copy number variants on miRNA genes in autism by Monte
Carlo simulation.

Marrale M(1), Albanese NN(1), CalÃ¬ F(2), Romano V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, UniversitÃ  di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(2)U.O.C. di Genetica Medica Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Associazione
Oasi Maria SS. (I.R.C.C.S.), Troina, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, 
UniversitÃ  di Palermo, Palermo, Italy; U.O.C. di Genetica Medica Laboratorio di
Genetica Molecolare, Associazione Oasi Maria SS. (I.R.C.C.S.), Troina, Italy.

Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) are childhood neurodevelopmental disorders with 
complex genetic origins. Previous studies have investigated the role of de novo
Copy Number Variants (CNVs) and microRNAs as important but distinct etiological
factors in ASD. We developed a novel computational procedure to assess the
potential pathogenic role of microRNA genes overlapping de novo CNVs in ASD
patients. Here we show that for chromosomes # 1, 2 and 22 the actual number of
miRNA loci affected by de novo CNVs in patients was found significantly higher
than that estimated by Monte Carlo simulation of random CNV events. Out of 24
miRNA genes over-represented in CNVs from these three chromosomes only
hsa-mir-4436b-1 and hsa-mir-4436b-2 have not been detected in CNVs from
non-autistic subjects as reported in the Database of Genomic Variants. Altogether
the results reported in this study represent a first step towards a full
understanding of how a dysregulated expression of the 24 miRNAs genes affect
neurodevelopment in autism. We also propose that the procedure used in this study
can be effectively applied to CNVs/miRNA genes association data in other genomic 
disorders beyond autism.

PMCID: PMC3965395
PMID: 24667286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neurogenetics. 2014 May;15(2):117-27. doi: 10.1007/s10048-014-0394-0. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Identification of risk genes for autism spectrum disorder through copy number
variation analysis in Austrian families.

Egger G(1), Roetzer KM, Noor A, Lionel AC, Mahmood H, Schwarzbraun T, Boright O, 
Mikhailov A, Marshall CR, Windpassinger C, Petek E, Scherer SW, Kaschnitz W,
Vincent JB.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, R-30, The Campbell Family Brain Research Institute, The
Centre for Addiction & Mental Health (CAMH), 250 College Street, Toronto, ON, M5T
1R8, Canada.

Autism or autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a range of neurodevelopmental
disorders starting in early childhood and is characterized by impairments in
communication and reciprocal social interaction and presence of restricted and
repetitive patterns of behavior. The contribution of genetic factors to autism is
clear in twin and family studies. It is apparent that, overall, ASD is a complex 
non-Mendelian disorder. Recent studies suggest that copy number variations (CNVs)
play a significant role in the etiology of ASD. For the current work, we
recruited 245 family members from 73 ASD families from Styria, Austria. The DNA
from probands was genotyped with Affymetrix single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
6.0 microarrays to screen for CNVs in their genomes. Analysis of the microarray
data was performed using three different algorithms, and a list of stringent
calls was compared to existing CNV data from over 2,357 controls of European
ancestry. For stringent calls not present in controls, quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) was used to validate the CNVs in the probands and in their family
members. Twenty-two CNVs were validated from this set (five of which are
apparently de novo), many of which appear likely to disrupt genes that may be
considered as good candidates for neuropsychiatric disorders, including DLG2,
S100B, ARX, DIP2A, HPCAL1, and GPHN. Several others disrupt genes that have
previously been implicated in autism, such as BDNF, AUTS2, DPP6, and C18orf22,
and our data add to the growing evidence of their involvement in ASD.

PMID: 24643514  [PubMed - in process]


38. Autism Res. 2014 Apr;7(2):254-63. doi: 10.1002/aur.1365. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

A deletion involving CD38 and BST1 results in a fusion transcript in a patient
with autism and asthma.

Ceroni F(1), Sagar A, Simpson NH, Gawthrope AJ, Newbury DF, Pinto D, Francis SM, 
Tessman DC, Cook EH, Monaco AP, Maestrini E, Pagnamenta AT, Jacob S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Bologna,
Italy.

CD38 encodes a ligand in the oxytocin signaling pathway. Some single nucleotide
polymorphisms in this gene have been associated with low serum oxytocin levels in
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) patients. Oxytocin disruption has been
hypothesized to account for features of ASD, including impaired communication and
social behavior, based on animal studies. Recent human studies have shown
administration of oxytocin improving emotion recognition, promoting social
behavior, and improving auditory processing of social stimuli in ASD patients. In
addition to its role in oxytocin signaling, CD38 is involved in the regulation of
calcium concentration in airway smooth muscle with impairment of CD38 being
implicated in airway diseases like asthma. While a number of studies have
implicated rare chromosomal deletions and duplications in helping determine
genetic risk for autism, there are to our knowledge no reports describing
rearrangements involving CD38 or deletions in patients with ASD. Here, we present
two sisters diagnosed with autism and with features of regression-previously
acquired speech lost in the second year of life. The younger sister, who also had
asthma, inherited a maternal deletion of 4p15.32 that results in a BST1-CD38
fusion transcript. Their mother's deletion was mosaic and she was not affected.
Although further work is required to assess functional consequences of the fusion
transcript, we hypothesize that the proband's deletion may have served as a risk 
factor for autism that, when combined with other susceptibility variants,
resulted in a more severe presentation than her sister.

Â© 2014 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4309371
PMID: 24634087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Case Rep Genet. 2014;2014:516529. doi: 10.1155/2014/516529. Epub 2014 Jan 19.

Absence of substantial copy number differences in a pair of monozygotic twins
discordant for features of autism spectrum disorder.

Laplana M(1), Royo JL(1), Aluja A(2), LÃ³pez R(3), Heine-Sunyer D(4), Fibla J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetic Unit, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Lleida, 25198 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain ; Genetics of Complex Diseases Research
Group, Biomedical Research Institute of Lleida (IRBLleida), 25198 Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. (2)Biological-Factorial Models of Personality, Department of
Psychology, University of Lleida, 25001 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain. (3)Human
Genetic Unit, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Lleida, 25198
Lleida, Catalonia, Spain ; Clinical Analysis Service, Universitari Arnau de
Vilanova University Hospital, 25198 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain. (4)Department of
Genetics, Son Espases University Hospital, 07120 Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable disease (~0.9) with a
complex genetic etiology. It is initially characterized by altered cognitive
ability which commonly includes impaired language and communication skills as
well as fundamental deficits in social interaction. Despite the large amount of
studies described so far, the high clinical diversity affecting the autism
phenotype remains poorly explained. Recent studies suggest that rare genomic
variations, in particular copy number variation (CNV), may account for a
significant proportion of the genetic basis of ASD. The use of disease-discordant
monozygotic twins represents a powerful strategy to identify de novo and
inherited CNV in the disorder. Here we present the results of a comparative
genome hybridization (CGH) analysis with a pair of monozygotic twins affected of 
ASD with significant differences in their clinical manifestations that specially 
affect speech language impairment and communication skills. Array CGH was
performed in three different tissues: blood, saliva, and hair follicle, in an
attempt to identify germinal and somatic CNV regions that may explain these
differences. Our results argue against a role of large CNV rearrangements as a
molecular etiology of the observed differences. This forwards future research to 
explore de novo point mutation and epigenomic alterations as potential
explanations of the observed clinical differences.

PMCID: PMC3915920
PMID: 24563798  [PubMed]


40. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan 30;10(1):e1004139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004139.
eCollection 2014.

Large inverted duplications in the human genome form via a fold-back mechanism.

Hermetz KE(1), Newman S(1), Conneely KN(2), Martin CL(1), Ballif BC(3), Shaffer
LG(3), Cody JD(4), Rudd MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America. (2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America ;
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University School of Public
Health, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America. (3)Signature Genomic
Laboratories, PerkinElmer, Inc., Spokane, Washington, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America ; The Chromosome 18
Registry and Research Society, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America.

Inverted duplications are a common type of copy number variation (CNV) in
germline and somatic genomes. Large duplications that include many genes can lead
to both neurodevelopmental phenotypes in children and gene amplifications in
tumors. There are several models for inverted duplication formation, most of
which include a dicentric chromosome intermediate followed by
breakage-fusion-bridge (BFB) cycles, but the mechanisms that give rise to the
inverted dicentric chromosome in most inverted duplications remain unknown. Here 
we have combined high-resolution array CGH, custom sequence capture,
next-generation sequencing, and long-range PCR to analyze the breakpoints of 50
nonrecurrent inverted duplications in patients with intellectual disability,
autism, and congenital anomalies. For half of the rearrangements in our study, we
sequenced at least one breakpoint junction. Sequence analysis of breakpoint
junctions reveals a normal-copy disomic spacer between inverted and non-inverted 
copies of the duplication. Further, short inverted sequences are present at the
boundary of the disomic spacer and the inverted duplication. These data support a
mechanism of inverted duplication formation whereby a chromosome with a
double-strand break intrastrand pairs with itself to form a "fold-back"
intermediate that, after DNA replication, produces a dicentric inverted
chromosome with a disomic spacer corresponding to the site of the fold-back loop.
This process can lead to inverted duplications adjacent to terminal deletions,
inverted duplications juxtaposed to translocations, and inverted duplication ring
chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC3907307
PMID: 24497845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 27;8(12):e85093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085093.
eCollection 2013.

Random or stochastic monoallelic expressed genes are enriched for
neurodevelopmental disorder candidate genes.

Jeffries AR(1), Collier DA(2), Vassos E(3), Curran S(3), Ogilvie CM(4), Price
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Centre for the Cellular Basis of Behaviour,
Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Discovery Neuroscience Research, Eli Lilly and Company Limited,Â Surrey, United
Kingdom ; Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom. (3)Social, Genetic and
Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom. (4)Cytogenetics Department, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.

Random or stochastic monoallelic expressed genes (StMA genes) represent a unique 
form of monoallelic expression where allelic choice is made at random early in
development. The consequential clonal diversity provides opportunity for
functional heterozygosity in tissues such as the brain, and can impact on both
development and disease. We investigate the relationship of StMA expressed genes 
previously identified in clonal neural stem cells with the neurodevelopmental
disorders autism and schizophrenia. We found that StMA genes show an
overrepresentation of schizophrenia risk candidates identified by genome wide
association studies from the genetic association database. Similar suggestive
enrichment was also found for genes from the NHGRI genome-wide association study 
catalog and a psychiatric genetics consortium schizophrenia dataset although
these latter more robust gene lists did not achieve statistical significance. We 
also examined multiple sources of copy number variation (CNV) datasets from
autism and schizophrenia cohorts. After taking into account total gene numbers
and CNV size, both autism and schizophrenia associated CNVs appeared to show an
enrichment of StMA genes relative to the control CNV datasets. Since the StMA
genes were originally identified in neural stem cells, bias due to the neural
transcriptome is possible. To address this, we randomly sampled neural stem cell 
expressed genes and repeated the tests. After a significant number of iterations,
neural stem cell expressed genes did not show an overrepresentation in autism or 
schizophrenia CNV datasets. Therefore, irrespective of the neural derived
transcriptome, StMA genes originally identified in neural stem cells show an
overrepresentation in CNVs associated with autism and schizophrenia. If this
association is functional, then the regulation (or dysregulation) of this form of
allelic expression status within tissues such as the brain may be a contributory 
risk factor for neurodevelopmental disorders and may also influence disease
discordance sometimes observed in monozygotic twins.

PMCID: PMC3874034
PMID: 24386451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014 Feb;68(2):85-95. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12128. Epub 2013
Dec 29.

Copy-number variation in the pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorder.

Shishido E(1), Aleksic B, Ozaki N.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Tokyo, Japan; Restart
Postdoctoral Fellowship of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo,
Japan; Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Autism spectrum disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder present in 1% of the
population, characterized by impairments in reciprocal social interaction,
communication deficits and restricted patterns of behavior. Approximately 10% of 
the autism spectrum disorder population is thought to have large chromosomal
rearrangements. Copy-number variations (CNV) alter the genome structure either by
duplication or deletion of a chromosomal region. The association between CNV and 
autism susceptibility has become more apparent through the use of methods based
on comparative genomic hybridization in screening CNV. The nature of the high CNV
rate in the human genome is partly explained by non-allelic homologous
recombination between flanking repeated sequences derived from multiple copies of
transposons or mobile genetic elements. There are hotspots for CNV in the human
genome, such as 16p11.2 and 22q11.2. Genes involved in CNV are supposed to have
copy-number dose-dependent effects on the behavior of affected individuals.
Animal models give insight into the possible interactions between core genetic
loci and additional factors contributing to the phenotypes of each individual. If
affected genes code for cellular signaling molecules, reducing the dosage in the 
intracellular signaling pathway may result in the malfunction of the nervous
system. The genetic background of autism spectrum disorder is highly heterogenic 
and most common or rare CNV do not lead to autism spectrum disorders in the
majority of cases, but may occasionally increase the risk of developing an autism
spectrum disorder.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences Â© 2013 Japanese Society
of Psychiatry and Neurology.

PMID: 24372918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Syndromol. 2015 Feb;6(1):7-22. doi: 10.1159/000371594. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Connecting the CNTNAP2 Networks with Neurodevelopmental Disorders.

Poot M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Based on genomic rearrangements and copy number variations, the
contactin-associated protein-like 2 gene (CNTNAP2) has been implicated in
neurodevelopmental disorders such as Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, intellectual
disability, obsessive compulsive disorder, cortical dysplasia-focal epilepsy
syndrome, autism, schizophrenia, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. To explain the phenotypic pleiotropy of CNTNAP2
alterations, several hypotheses have been put forward. Those include gene
disruption, loss of a gene copy by a heterozygous deletion, altered regulation of
gene expression due to loss of transcription factor binding and DNA methylation
sites, and mutations in the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein which may 
provoke altered interactions of the CNTNAP2-encoded protein, Caspr2, with other
proteins. Also exome sequencing, which covers <0.2% of the CNTNAP2 genomic DNA,
has revealed numerous single nucleotide variants in healthy individuals and in
patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. In some of these disorders,
disruption of CNTNAP2 may be interpreted as a susceptibility factor rather than a
directly causative mutation. In addition to being associated with impaired
development of language, CNTNAP2 may turn out to be a central node in the
molecular networks controlling neurodevelopment. This review discusses the impact
of CNTNAP2 mutations on its functioning at multiple levels of the combinatorial
genetic networks that govern brain development. In addition, recommendations for 
genomic testing in the context of clinical genetic management of patients with
neurodevelopmental disorders and their families are put forward.

PMID: 25852443  [PubMed]


2. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 27;11(3):e1004998. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004998.
eCollection 2015.

Synergistic Interactions between Drosophila Orthologues of Genes Spanned by De
Novo Human CNVs Support Multiple-Hit Models of Autism.

Grice SJ(1), Liu JL(1), Webber C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology,
Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are highly heritable and characterised by
deficits in social interaction and communication, as well as restricted and
repetitive behaviours. Although a number of highly penetrant ASD gene variants
have been identified, there is growing evidence to support a causal role for
combinatorial effects arising from the contributions of multiple loci. By
examining synaptic and circadian neurological phenotypes resulting from the
dosage variants of unique human:fly orthologues in Drosophila, we observe
numerous synergistic interactions between pairs of informatically-identified
candidate genes whose orthologues are jointly affected by large de novo copy
number variants (CNVs). These CNVs were found in the genomes of individuals with 
autism, including a patient carrying a 22q11.2 deletion. We first demonstrate
that dosage alterations of the unique Drosophila orthologues of candidate genes
from de novo CNVs that harbour only a single candidate gene display neurological 
defects similar to those previously reported in Drosophila models of
ASD-associated variants. We then considered pairwise dosage changes within the
set of orthologues of candidate genes that were affected by the same single human
de novo CNV. For three of four CNVs with complete orthologous relationships, we
observed significant synergistic effects following the simultaneous dosage change
of gene pairs drawn from a single CNV. The phenotypic variation observed at the
Drosophila synapse that results from these interacting genetic variants supports 
a concordant phenotypic outcome across all interacting gene pairs following the
direction of human gene copy number change. We observe both specificity and
transitivity between interactors, both within and between CNV candidate gene
sets, supporting shared and distinct genetic aetiologies. We then show that
different interactions affect divergent synaptic processes, demonstrating
distinct molecular aetiologies. Our study illustrates mechanisms through which
synergistic effects resulting from large structural variation can contribute to
human disease.

PMCID: PMC4376901
PMID: 25816101  [PubMed - in process]


3. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Mar 20;445:34-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.03.013. [Epub
ahead of print]

An efficient screening method for simultaneous detection of recurrent copy number
variants associated with psychiatric disorders.

Rodriguez-Lopez J(1), Carrera N(1), Arrojo M(2), Amigo J(3), Sobrino B(4), PÃ¡ramo
M(2), Paz E(2), Agra S(2), Ramos-RÃ­os R(2), Brenlla J(2), Carracedo Ã(5), Costas 
J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de InvestigaciÃ³n Sanitaria (IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo
Galego de SaÃºde (SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain; FundaciÃ³n PÃºblica Galega
de Medicina XenÃ³mica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (2)Instituto de
InvestigaciÃ³n Sanitaria (IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo Galego de SaÃºde
(SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Servizo de PsiquiatrÃ­a, Complexo
Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo Galego de SaÃºde
(SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (3)Instituto de InvestigaciÃ³n Sanitaria 
(IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo Galego de SaÃºde (SERGAS), Santiago de
Compostela, Spain; Grupo de Medicina XenÃ³mica, Universidade de Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (4)FundaciÃ³n PÃºblica Galega de
Medicina XenÃ³mica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (5)Instituto de InvestigaciÃ³n
Sanitaria (IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo Galego de SaÃºde (SERGAS),
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; FundaciÃ³n PÃºblica Galega de Medicina XenÃ³mica,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Grupo de Medicina XenÃ³mica, Universidade de
Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (6)Instituto de
InvestigaciÃ³n Sanitaria (IDIS) de Santiago de Compostela, Servizo Galego de SaÃºde
(SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Electronic address:
javier.costas.costas@sergas.es.

Several recurrent copy number variants (CNVs) increasing risk to neuropsychiatric
diseases have been identified in recent years. They show variable clinical
expressivity, being associated with different disorders, and incomplete
penetrance. However, due to its very low frequency, the full variety of clinical 
outcomes associated with each one of these CNVs is unknown. Current methods for
detection of CNVs are labor intensive, expensive or not suitable for high
throughput analysis. Quantitative interspecies competitive PCR linked to variant 
minisequencing and detection by mass-spectrometry may overcome these limitations.
Here, we present two multiplex assays based on this method to screen for eleven
psychiatric risk CNVs, such as 1q21, 16p11.2, 3q29, or 16p13.11 regions, among
others. The assays were tested in our collection of 514 schizophrenia patients.
Results were compared with MLPA at two CNVs. Additional positive results were
confirmed by exome sequencing. A total of fourteen patients were CNV carriers.
The method presents high sensitivity and specificity, showing its utility as a
cheap, accurate, high throughput screening tool for recurrent CNVs. The method
may be very useful for management of psychiatric patients as well as screening of
different collections of samples to better identify the full spectrum of clinical
variability.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25797897  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Hum Genet. 2015 Mar 20. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of 26 deletion CNVs reveals the frequent occurrence of
micro-mutations within the breakpoint-flanking regions and frequent repair of
double-strand breaks by templated insertions derived from remote genomic regions.

Wang Y(1), Su P, Hu B, Zhu W, Li Q, Yuan P, Li J, Guan X, Li F, Jing X, Li R,
Zhang Y, FÃ©rec C, Cooper DN, Wang J, Huang D, Chen JM, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Zhongshan School of Medicine and Center for
Genome Research, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.

Copy number variations (CNVs) have increasingly been reported to cause, or
predispose to, human disease. However, a large fraction of these CNVs have not
been accurately characterized at the single-base-pair level, thereby hampering a 
better understanding of the mutational mechanisms underlying CNV formation. Here,
employing a composite pipeline method derived from various inference-based
programs, we have characterized 26 deletion CNVs [including three novel
pathogenic CNVs involving an autosomal gene (EXT2) causing hereditary
osteochondromas and an X-linked gene (CLCN5) causing Dent disease, as well as 23 
CNVs previously identified by inference from a cohort of Canadian autism spectrum
disorder families] to the single-base-pair level of accuracy from whole-genome
sequencing data. We found that breakpoint-flanking micro-mutations (within 22Â bp 
of the breakpoint) are present in a significant fraction (5/26; 19Â %) of the
deletion CNVs. This analysis also provided evidence that a recently described
error-prone form of DNA repair (i.e., repair of DNA double-strand breaks by
templated nucleotide sequence insertions derived from distant regions of the
genome) not only causes human genetic disease but also impacts on human genome
evolution. Our findings illustrate the importance of precise CNV breakpoint
delineation for understanding the underlying mutational mechanisms and have
implications for primer design in relation to the detection of deletion CNVs in
clinical diagnosis.

PMID: 25792359  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. BMC Med Genomics. 2015;8 Suppl 1:S7. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S1-S7. Epub 2015
Jan 15.

Performance of case-control rare copy number variation annotation in
classification of autism.

Engchuan W, Dhindsa K, Lionel AC, Scherer SW, Chan JH, Merico D.

BACKGROUND: A substantial proportion of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) risk
resides in de novo germline and rare inherited genetic variation. In particular, 
rare copy number variation (CNV) contributes to ASD risk in up to 10% of ASD
subjects. Despite the striking degree of genetic heterogeneity, case-control
studies have detected specific burden of rare disruptive CNV for neuronal and
neurodevelopmental pathways. Here, we used machine learning methods to classify
ASD subjects and controls, based on rare CNV data and comprehensive gene
annotations. We investigated performance of different methods and estimated the
percentage of ASD subjects that could be reliably classified based on presumed
etiologic CNV they carry.
RESULTS: We analyzed 1,892 Caucasian ASD subjects and 2,342 matched controls.
Rare CNVs (frequency 1% or less) were detected using Illumina 1M and 1M-Duo
BeadChips. Conditional Inference Forest (CF) typically performed as well as or
better than other classification methods. We found a maximum AUC (area under the 
ROC curve) of 0.533 when considering all ASD subjects with rare genic CNVs,
corresponding to 7.9% correctly classified ASD subjects and less than 3%
incorrectly classified controls; performance was significantly higher when
considering only subjects harboring de novo or pathogenic CNVs. We also found
rare losses to be more predictive than gains and that curated neurally-relevant
annotations (brain expression, synaptic components and neurodevelopmental
phenotypes) outperform Gene Ontology and pathway-based annotations.
CONCLUSIONS: CF is an optimal classification approach for case-control rare CNV
data and it can be used to prioritize subjects with variants potentially
contributing to ASD risk not yet recognized. The neurally-relevant annotations
used in this study could be successfully applied to rare CNV case-control
data-sets for other neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC4315323
PMID: 25783485  [PubMed - in process]


6. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Jan 22. pii: S0197-4580(15)00044-5. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.01.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Rare structural genetic variation in human prion diseases.

Lukic A(1), Uphill J(1), Brown CA(1), Beck J(1), Poulter M(1), Campbell T(1),
Adamson G(1), Hummerich H(1), Whitfield J(1), Ponto C(2), Zerr I(2), Lloyd SE(1),
Collinge J(1), Mead S(3).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Prion Unit and Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of
Neurology, London, UK. (2)Department of Neurology, Georg-August University
GÃ¶ttingen, GÃ¶ttingen, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenrative Diseases
(DZNE), Gottingen, Germany. (3)MRC Prion Unit and Department of Neurodegenerative
Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK. Electronic address:
s.mead@prion.ucl.ac.uk.

Prion diseases are a diverse group of neurodegenerative conditions, caused by the
templated misfolding of prion protein. Aside from the strong genetic risk
conferred by multiple variants of the prion protein gene (PRNP), several other
variants have been suggested to confer risk in the most common type, sporadic
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) or in the acquired prion diseases. Large and
rare copy number variants (CNVs) are known to confer risk in several related
disorders including Alzheimer's disease (at APP), schizophrenia, epilepsy, mental
retardation, and autism. Here, we report the first genome-wide analysis for
CNV-associated risk using data derived from a recent international collaborative 
association study in sCJD (nÂ = 1147 after quality control) and publicly available
controls (nÂ = 5427). We also investigated UK patients with variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (nÂ = 114) and elderly women from the Eastern Highlands 
of Papua New Guinea who proved highly resistant to the epidemic prion disease
kuru, who were compared with healthy young Fore population controls (nÂ = 395).
There were no statistically significant alterations in the burden of CNVs >100,
>500, or >1000 kb, duplications, or deletions in any disease group or geographic 
region. After correction for multiple testing, no statistically significant
associations were found. A UK blood service control sample showed a duplication
CNV that overlapped PRNP, but these were not found in prion disease. Heterozygous
deletions of a 3' region of the PARK2 gene were found in 3 sCJD patients and no
controls (pÂ = 0.001, uncorrected). A cell-based prion infection assay did not
provide supportive evidence for a role for PARK2 in prion disease susceptibility.
These data are consistent with a modest impact of CNVs on risk of late-onset
neurologic conditions and suggest that, unlike APP, PRNP duplication is not a
causal high-risk mutation.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25726360  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb 24. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.5. [Epub ahead of print]

Disruptive de novo mutations of DYRK1A lead to a syndromic form of autism and ID.

van Bon BW(1), Coe BP(2), Bernier R(3), Green C(4), Gerdts J(3), Witherspoon
K(2), Kleefstra T(5), Willemsen MH(5), Kumar R(6), Bosco P(7), Fichera M(8), Li
D(9), Amaral D(9), Cristofoli F(10), Peeters H(11), Haan E(12), Romano C(7),
Mefford HC(3), Scheffer I(4), Gecz J(13), de Vries BB(14), Eichler EE(15).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands [2] School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (2)Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. (3)Department of
Psychiatry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (4)Florey Institute,
University of Melbourne, Austin Health and Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia. (5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (6)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive
Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(7)I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy. (8)1] I.R.C.C.S.
Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy [2] Medical Genetics,
University of Catania, Catania, Italy. (9)Representing the Autism Phenome
Project, MIND Institute, University of California-Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(10)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (11)1] Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium [2] Leuven Autism Research (LAuRes), Leuven, Belgium.
(12)1] School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [2] South Australian Clinical Genetics
Service, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (13)1] School of
Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia [2] South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, SA
Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia [3] Robinson Institute,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (14)1] Department
of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
[2] Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud university
medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (15)1] Department of Genome Sciences, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA [2] Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Dual-specificity tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1 A (DYRK1A) maps 
to the Down syndrome critical region; copy number increase of this gene is
thought to have a major role in the neurocognitive deficits associated with
Trisomy 21. Truncation of DYRK1A in patients with developmental delay (DD) and
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) suggests a different pathology associated with
loss-of-function mutations. To understand the phenotypic spectrum associated with
DYRK1A mutations, we resequenced the gene in 7162 ASD/DD patients (2446
previously reported) and 2169 unaffected siblings and performed a detailed
phenotypic assessment on nine patients. Comparison of our data and published
cases with 8696 controls identified a significant enrichment of DYRK1A truncating
mutations (P=0.00851) and an excess of de novo mutations (P=2.53 Ã 10(-10)) among
ASD/intellectual disability (ID) patients. Phenotypic comparison of all novel
(n=5) and recontacted (n=3) cases with previous case reports, including larger
CNV and translocation events (n=7), identified a syndromal disorder among the 15 
patients. It was characterized by ID, ASD, microcephaly, intrauterine growth
retardation, febrile seizures in infancy, impaired speech, stereotypic behavior, 
hypertonia and a specific facial gestalt. We conclude that mutations in DYRK1A
define a syndromic form of ASD and ID with neurodevelopmental defects consistent 
with murine and Drosophila knockout models.Molecular Psychiatry advance online
publication, 24 February 2015; doi:10.1038/mp.2015.5.

PMID: 25707398  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Neuron. 2015 Feb 18;85(4):742-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.01.010.

Spatiotemporal 16p11.2 protein network implicates cortical late mid-fetal brain
development and KCTD13-Cul3-RhoA pathway in psychiatric diseases.

Lin GN(1), Corominas R(1), Lemmens I(2), Yang X(3), Tavernier J(2), Hill DE(3),
Vidal M(3), Sebat J(4), Iakoucheva LM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. (2)Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, and Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, 9000
Ghent, Belgium. (3)Center for Cancer Systems Biology (CCSB) and Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (4)Department of Psychiatry, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Beyster Center for Genomics of
Psychiatric Diseases, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA. (5)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: lilyak@ucsd.edu.

The psychiatric disorders autism and schizophrenia have a strong genetic
component, and copy number variants (CNVs) are firmly implicated. Recurrent
deletions and duplications of chromosome 16p11.2 confer a high risk for both
diseases, but the pathways disrupted by this CNV are poorly defined. Here we
investigate the dynamics of the 16p11.2 network by integrating physical
interactions of 16p11.2 proteins with spatiotemporal gene expression from the
developing human brain. We observe profound changes in protein interaction
networks throughout different stages of brain development and/or in different
brain regions. We identify the late mid-fetal period of cortical development as
most critical for establishing the connectivity of 16p11.2 proteins with their
co-expressed partners. Furthermore, our results suggest that the regulation of
the KCTD13-Cul3-RhoA pathway in layer 4 of the inner cortical plate is crucial
for controlling brain size and connectivity and that its dysregulation by de novo
mutations may be a potential determinant of 16p11.2 CNV deletion and duplication 
phenotypes.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4335356 [Available on 2016-02-18]
PMID: 25695269  [PubMed - in process]


9. Mol Autism. 2014 Aug 20;5:44. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-44. eCollection 2014.

Gene expression analysis of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons
carrying copy number variants of chromosome 15q11-q13.1.

Germain ND(1), Chen PF(1), Plocik AM(1), Glatt-Deeley H(1), Brown J(2), Fink
JJ(3), Bolduc KA(3), Robinson TM(3), Levine ES(3), Reiter LT(4), Graveley BR(5), 
Lalande M(1), Chamberlain SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06032, USA. (2)Chromosome
Core, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and Department of Allied Health
Sciences, University of Connecticut, 354 Mansfield Road, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (4)Department of Neurology,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 855 Monroe Avenue, Suite 415,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA. (5)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology,
University of Connecticut Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT
06032, USA ; University of Connecticut Institute for Systems Genomics,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Duplications of the chromosome 15q11-q13.1 region are associated with
an estimated 1 to 3% of all autism cases, making this copy number variation (CNV)
one of the most frequent chromosome abnormalities associated with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). Several genes located within the 15q11-q13.1 duplication region
including ubiquitin protein ligase E3A (UBE3A), the gene disrupted in Angelman
syndrome (AS), are involved in neural function and may play important roles in
the neurobehavioral phenotypes associated with chromosome 15q11-q13.1 duplication
(Dup15q) syndrome.
METHODS: We have generated induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from five
different individuals containing CNVs of 15q11-q13.1. The iPSC lines were
differentiated into mature, functional neurons. Gene expression across the
15q11-q13.1 locus was compared among the five iPSC lines and corresponding
iPSC-derived neurons using quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR).
Genome-wide gene expression was compared between neurons derived from three iPSC 
lines using mRNA-Seq.
RESULTS: Analysis of 15q11-q13.1 gene expression in neurons derived from Dup15q
iPSCs reveals that gene copy number does not consistently predict expression
levels in cells with interstitial duplications of 15q11-q13.1. mRNA-Seq
experiments show that there is substantial overlap in the genes differentially
expressed between 15q11-q13.1 deletion and duplication neurons, Finally, we
demonstrate that UBE3A transcripts can be pharmacologically rescued to normal
levels in iPSC-derived neurons with a 15q11-q13.1 duplication.
CONCLUSIONS: Chromatin structure may influence gene expression across the
15q11-q13.1 region in neurons. Genome-wide analyses suggest that common neuronal 
pathways may be disrupted in both the Angelman and Dup15q syndromes. These data
demonstrate that our disease-specific stem cell models provide a new tool to
decipher the underlying cellular and genetic disease mechanisms of ASD and may
also offer a pathway to novel therapeutic intervention in Dup15q syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4332023
PMID: 25694803  [PubMed]


10. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Feb 11. pii: bhv008. [Epub ahead of print]

Auditory Evoked M100 Response Latency is Delayed in Children with 16p11.2
Deletion but not 16p11.2 Duplication.

Jenkins J 3rd(1), Chow V(1), Blaskey L(1), Kuschner E(1), Qasmieh S(1), Gaetz
L(1), Edgar JC(1), Mukherjee P(2), Buckner R(3), Nagarajan SS(2), Chung WK(4),
Spiro JE(5), Sherr EH(6), Berman JI(1), Roberts TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lurie Family Foundations MEG Imaging Center, Department of Radiology,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department
of Radiology. (3)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY 10032, USA. (5)Simons Foundation, New York, NY 10010, USA. (6)Department
of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Individuals with the 16p11.2 BP4-BP5 copy number variant (CNV) exhibit a range of
behavioral phenotypes that may include mild impairment in cognition and clinical 
diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). To better understand auditory
processing impairments in populations with this chromosomal variation, auditory
evoked responses were examined in children with the 16p11.2 deletion, 16p11.2
duplication, and age-matched controls. Stimuli consisted of sinusoidal binaural
tones presented passively while children underwent recording with
magnetoencephalography (MEG). The primary indicator of auditory processing
impairment was the latency of the â¼100-ms "M100" auditory response detected by
MEG, with the 16p11.2 deletion population exhibiting profoundly delayed M100
latencies relative to controls. This delay remained even after controlling for
potential confounds such as age and cognitive ability. No significant difference 
in M100 latency was observed between 16p11.2 duplication carriers and controls.
Additionally, children meeting diagnostic criteria for ASD (16p11.2 deletion
carriers) exhibited nonsignificant latency delays when compared with the
corresponding CNV carriers not meeting criteria for ASD. Present results indicate
that 16p11.2 deletion is associated with auditory processing delays analogous to 
(but substantially more pronounced than) those previously reported in
"idiopathic" ASD.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25678630  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. J Neural Transm. 2015 Jan 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Genomic structural variants are linked with intellectual disability.

Bulayeva K(1), Lesch KP, Bulayev O, Walsh C, Glatt S, Gurgenova F, Omarova J,
Berdichevets I, Thompson PM.

Author information: 
(1)N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Gubkin str. 3, Moscow, 119991, Russia, bulaeva@vigg.ru.

Mutations in more than 500 genes have been associated with intellectual
disability (ID) and related disorders of cognitive function, such as autism and
schizophrenia. Here we aimed to unravel the molecular epidemiology of
non-specific ID in a genetic isolate using a combination of population and
molecular genetic approaches. A large multigenerational pedigree was ascertained 
within a Dagestan Genetic Heritage research program in a genetic isolate of
indigenous ethnics. Clinical characteristics of the affected members were based
on combining diagnoses from regional psychiatric hospitals with our own clinical 
assessment, using a Russian translation of the structured psychiatric interviews,
the Diagnostic Interview for Genetic Studies and the Family Interview for Genetic
Studies, based on DSM-IV criteria. Weber/CHLC 9.0 STRs set was used for
multipoint parametric linkage analyses (Simwalk2.91). Next, we checked CNVs and
LOH (based on Affymetrix SNP 5.0 data) in the linked with ID genomic regions with
the aim to identify candidate genes associated with mutations in linked regions. 
The number of statistically significant (pÂ â¤Â 0.05) suggestive linkage peaks with 
1.3Â <Â LODÂ <Â 3.0 we detected in a total of 10 genomic regions: 1q41, 2p25.3-p24.2,
3p13-p12.1, 4q13.3, 10p11, 11q23, 12q24.22-q24.31, 17q24.2-q25.1, 21q22.13 and
22q12.3-q13.1. Three significant linkage signals with LOD >3 were obtained at
2p25.3-p24.2 under the dominant model, with a peak at 21 cM flanked by loci
D2S2976 and D2S2952; at 12q24.22-q24.31 under the recessive model, with a peak at
-120 cM flanked by marker D12S2070 and D12S395 and at 22q12.3 under the dominant 
model, with a peak at 32 cM flanked by marker D22S683 and D22S445. After a set of
genes had been designated as possible candidates in these specific chromosomal
regions,we conducted an exploratory search for LOH and CNV based on microarray
data to detect structural genomic variants within five ID-linked regions with LOD
scores between 2.0 and 3.9. In these selected regions we obtained 173 ROH
segments and 98 CN segments. Further analysis of region 2p25.3-p24.2 revealed
deletions within genes encoding MYTL, SNTG2 and TPO among five of 21 affected
cases at 2p25.3-p24.2. In the ID-linked region at 12q24.22-12q24.31 19 out of 21 
ID cases carried segmental CNV and 20 of 21 them displayed ROH segments with mean
size lengths for ID cases 2512 kb (500-6,472 kb) and for healthy control 682 kb
(531-986Â kb), including the genes MED13L, HRK, FBXW8, TESC, CDK2AP1 and SBNO1.
Seven of 21 affected pedigree members displayed segmental deletions at 22q12.3
that includes the gene LARGE. Eight affected pedigree members carried ROH
segments and 6 CN segments at 10p11.23-p11.21 containing the genes ZEB1, c10orf68
and EPC1. Our linkage and structural genomic variation analyses in a remote
highland genetic isolate with aggregation of ID demonstrated that even highly
isolated single kindred ID has oligo/polygenic pathogenesis. The results obtained
implicate 10 genomic regions linked with ID that contain some of previously
reported candidate genes, including HRK, FBXW8, TESC, CDK2AP1 and SBNO1 at 12q24 
that were shown in recent studies as associated with brain measures derived from 
MRI scans.

PMID: 25626716  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Meta Gene. 2013 Dec 4;2:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2013.10.005. eCollection
2014.

Dental developmental abnormalities in a patient with subtelomeric 7q36 deletion
syndrome may confirm a novel role for the SHH gene.

Linhares ND(1), Svartman M(2), Salgado MI(3), Rodrigues TC(4), da Costa SS(4),
Rosenberg C(4), Valadares ER(5).

Author information: 
(1)Setor de CitogenÃ©tica/LaboratÃ³rio Central do Hospital das ClÃ­nicas da
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. (2)Departamento de 
Biologia Geral, Instituto de CiÃªncias BiolÃ³gicas, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Cirurgia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil. (4)Departamento de GenÃ©tica e Biologia
Evolutiva, Instituto de BiociÃªncias, Universidade de SÃ£o Paulo, SÃ£o Paulo,
Brazil. (5)Departamento de PropedÃªutica Complementar, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Studies in mice demonstrated that the Shh gene is crucial for normal development 
of both incisors and molars, causing a severe retardation in tooth growth, which 
leads to abnormal placement of the tooth in the jaw and disrupted tooth
morphogenesis. In humans the SHH gene is located on chromosome 7q36. Defects in
its protein or signaling pathway may cause holoprosencephaly spectrum, a disorder
in which the developing forebrain fails to correctly separate into right and left
hemispheres and that can be manifested in microforms such as single maxillary
central incisor. A novel role for this gene in the developing human primary
dentition was recently demonstrated. We report a 12-year old boy with a de novo
7q36.1-qter deletion characterized by high-resolution karyotyping,
oligonucleotide aCGH and FISH. His phenotype includes intellectual disability,
non-verbal communication, hypospadia, partial sacral agenesis and absence of
coccyx, which are distinctive features of the syndrome and mainly correlated with
the MNX1, HTR5A and EN2 genes. No microforms of holoprosencephaly spectrum were
observed; but the patient had diastema and dental developmental abnormalities,
such as conical, asymmetric and tapered inferior central incisors. The dental
anomalies are reported herein for the first time in subtelomeric 7q36 deletion
syndrome and may confirm clinically a novel role for the SHH gene in dental
development.

PMCID: PMC4287791
PMID: 25606385  [PubMed]


13. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Mar;58(3):140-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.01.002. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

15q11.2 microdeletion (BP1-BP2) and developmental delay, behaviour issues,
epilepsy and congenital heart disease: A series of 52 patients.

Vanlerberghe C(1), Petit F(2), Malan V(3), Vincent-Delorme C(2), Bouquillon S(4),
Boute O(2), Holder-Espinasse M(5), Delobel B(6), Duban B(6), Vallee L(7), Cuisset
JM(7), Lemaitre MP(7), Vantyghem MC(8), Pigeyre M(8), Lanco-Dosen S(9), Plessis
G(10), Gerard M(10), Decamp M(10), Mathieu M(11), Morin G(11), Jedraszak G(11),
Bilan F(12), Gilbert-Dussardier B(13), Fauvert D(14), Roume J(15), Cormier-Daire 
V(16), Caumes R(16), Puechberty J(17), Genevieve D(17), Sarda P(17), Pinson
L(17), Blanchet P(17), Lemeur N(18), Sheth F(19), Manouvrier-Hanu S(2), Andrieux 
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de gÃ©nÃ©tique mÃ©dicale, HÃ´pital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, France.
Electronic address: clemence.vanlerberghe@chru-lille.fr. (2)Service de gÃ©nÃ©tique 
clinique, HÃ´pital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, France. (3)Service de
cytogÃ©nÃ©tique et d'embryologie, HÃ´pital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris,
France. (4)Institut de gÃ©nÃ©tique mÃ©dicale, HÃ´pital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille,
France. (5)Service de gÃ©nÃ©tique clinique, HÃ´pital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, 
France; Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, London, UK. (6)Centre de
cytogÃ©nÃ©tique, HÃ´pital Saint Vincent de Paul, Lille, France. (7)Service de
neuropÃ©diatrie, HÃ´pital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, France. (8)Service
d'endocrinologie, HÃ´pital Claude Huriez, CHRU Lille, France. (9)Service de
neuropÃ©diatrie, HÃ´pital de Sambre - Avesnois, Maubeuge, France. (10)Service de
gÃ©nÃ©tique clinique, CHU Caen, France. (11)Service de gÃ©nÃ©tique clinique, CHU
Amiens, France. (12)Laboratoire de GÃ©nÃ©tique cellulaire et molÃ©culaire, PÃ´le
Biologie SantÃ©, CHU Poitiers, France. (13)Service de gÃ©nÃ©tique clinique, La
MilÃ©trie, CHU Poitiers, France. (14)Service de cytogÃ©nÃ©tique, CHI Poissy, France.
(15)UnitÃ© de gÃ©nÃ©tique mÃ©dicale, CHI Poissy, France. (16)UnitÃ© de gÃ©nÃ©tique
mÃ©dicale, HÃ´pital Necker-Enfants malades, AP-HP, Paris, France. (17)Service de
gÃ©nÃ©tique mÃ©dicale, CHRU Montpellier, France. (18)Service de cytogÃ©nÃ©tique, CHU
Rouen, France. (19)Institute of Human Genetics, Jodhpur Village Road, Gujarat,
India.

Proximal region of chromosome 15 long arm is rich in duplicons that, define five 
breakpoints (BP) for 15q rearrangements. 15q11.2 microdeletion between BP1 and
BP2 has been previously associated with developmental delay and atypical
psychological patterns. This region contains four highly-conserved and
non-imprinted genes: NIPA1, NIPA2, CYFIP1, TUBGCP5. Our goal was to investigate
the phenotypes associated with this microdeletion in a cohort of 52 patients.
This copy number variation (CNV) was prevalent in 0.8% patients presenting with
developmental delay, psychological pattern issues and/or multiple congenital
malformations. This was studied by array-CGH at six different French Genetic
laboratories. We collected data from 52 unrelated patients (including 3 foetuses)
after excluding patients with an associated genetic alteration (known CNV,
aneuploidy or known monogenic disease). Out of 52 patients, mild or moderate
developmental delay was observed in 68.3%, 85.4% had speech impairment and 63.4% 
had psychological issues such as Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder,
Autistic Spectrum Disorder or Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Seizures were noted 
in 18.7% patients and associated congenital heart disease in 17.3%. Parents were 
analysed for abnormalities in the region in 65.4% families. Amongst these
families, 'de novo' microdeletions were observed in 18.8% and 81.2% were
inherited from one of the parents. Incomplete penetrance and variable
expressivity were observed amongst the patients. Our results support the
hypothesis that 15q11.2 (BP1-BP2) microdeletion is associated with developmental 
delay, abnormal behaviour, generalized epilepsy and congenital heart disease. The
later feature has been rarely described. Incomplete penetrance and variability of
expression demands further assessment and studies.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 25596525  [PubMed - in process]


14. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;20(2):170-5. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.179. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Increased female autosomal burden of rare copy number variants in human
populations and in autism families.

Desachy G(1), Croen LA(2), Torres AR(3), Kharrazi M(4), Delorenze GN(2), Windham 
GC(5), Yoshida CK(2), Weiss LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Institute for Human Genetics, UCSF, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern
California, Oakland, CA, USA. (3)Center for Persons with Disabilities, Utah State
University, Logan, UT, USA. (4)Genetic Disease Screening Program, California
Department of Public Health, Richmond, CA, USA. (5)Division of Environmental and 
Occupational Disease Control, California Department of Public Health, Richmond,
CA, USA.

Autosomal genetic variation is presumed equivalent in males and females and makes
a major contribution to disease risk. We set out to identify whether maternal
copy number variants (CNVs) contribute to autism spectrum disorders (ASDs).
Surprisingly, we observed a higher autosomal burden of large, rare CNVs in
females in the population, reflected in, but not unique to, ASD families.
Meta-analysis across control data sets confirms female excess in CNV number
(P=2.1 Ã 10(-5)) and gene content (P=4.1 Ã 10(-3)). We additionally observed CNV 
enrichment in ASD mothers compared with control mothers (P=0.03). We speculate
that tolerance for CNV burden contributes to decreased female fetal loss in the
population and that ASD-specific maternal CNV burden may contribute to high
sibling recurrence. These data emphasize the need for study of familial CNV risk 
factors in ASDs and the requirement of sex-matched comparisons.

PMID: 25582617  [PubMed - in process]

