
1. J Med Genet. 2002 Mar;39(3):170-7.

Organisation of the pericentromeric region of chromosome 15: at least four
partial gene copies are amplified in patients with a proximal duplication of 15q.

Fantes JA(1), Mewborn SK, Lese CM, Hedrick J, Brown RL, Dyomin V, Chaganti RS,
Christian SL, Ledbetter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Clinical cytogenetic laboratories frequently identify an apparent duplication of 
proximal 15q that does not involve probes within the PWS/AS critical region and
is not associated with any consistent phenotype. Previous mapping data placed
several pseudogenes, NF1, IgH D/V, and GABRA5 in the pericentromeric region of
proximal 15q. Recent studies have shown that these pseudogene sequences have
increased copy numbers in subjects with apparent duplications of proximal 15q. To
determine the extent of variation in a control population, we analysed NF1 and
IgH D pseudogene copy number in interphase nuclei from 20 cytogenetically normal 
subjects by FISH. Both loci are polymorphic in controls, ranging from 1-4 signals
for NF1 and 1-3 signals for IgH D. Eight subjects with apparent duplications,
examined by the same method, showed significantly increased NF1 copy number (5-10
signals). IgH D copy number was also increased in 6/8 of these patients (4-9
signals). We identified a fourth pseudogene, BCL8A, which maps to the
pericentromeric region and is coamplified along with the NF1 sequences.
Interphase FISH ordering experiments show that IgH D lies closest to the
centromere, while BCL8A is the most distal locus in this pseudogene array; the
total size of the amplicon is estimated at approximately 1 Mb. The duplicated
chromosome was inherited from either sex parent, indicating no parent of origin
effect, and no consistent phenotype was present. FISH analysis with one or more
of these probes is therefore useful in discriminating polymorphic amplification
of proximal pseudogene sequences from clinically significant duplications of 15q.

PMCID: PMC1735052
PMID: 11897815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Mar 1;140(5):434-41.

Clinical findings in 33 subjects with large supernumerary marker(15) chromosomes 
and 3 subjects with triplication of 15q11-q13.

Dennis NR(1), Veltman MW, Thompson R, Craig E, Bolton PF, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, Southampton, United
Kingdom. nrd1@soton.ac.uk

We present clinical data on 33 subjects with additional copies of the
Prader-Willi-Angelman critical region (PWACR) contained in a supernumerary marker
chromosome (SMC). Twenty-three subjects had a typical large non-mosaic SMC(15)
containing two copies of the PWACR. They showed a variable but generally severe
phenotype of learning disability and autism, with seizures in approximately
two-thirds. The other 10 differed from this typical pattern in respect of
mosaicism, variation in copy number, or arrangement of the PWACR within the SMC
or number of SMC per cell. Clinical severity increased with the number of
additional copies of the PWACR and decreased with mosaicism for a normal cell
line. There was a trend for a larger number of seizures to be associated with
more severe learning disability. Three subjects with interstitial triplications
of 15q11-q13 showed a range of phenotypes similar to those of the typical large
SMC(15). All additional copies of the PWACR in this series were
maternally-derived. FISH and molecular data localizing the breakpoints of the
rearrangements have been previously published or are included in this report. No 
correlations were found between specific clinical features and variations in
breakpoints proximal and distal to the PWACR.

PMID: 16470730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;81(6):1289-97. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Contribution of SHANK3 mutations to autism spectrum disorder.

Moessner R(1), Marshall CR, Sutcliffe JS, Skaug J, Pinto D, Vincent J,
Zwaigenbaum L, Fernandez B, Roberts W, Szatmari P, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, M5G 1L7, Canada.

Mutations in SHANK3, which encodes a synaptic scaffolding protein, have been
described in subjects with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD). To assess the
quantitative contribution of SHANK3 to the pathogenesis of autism, we determined 
the frequency of DNA sequence and copy-number variants in this gene in 400
ASD-affected subjects ascertained in Canada. One de novo mutation and two gene
deletions were discovered, indicating a contribution of 0.75% in this cohort. One
additional SHANK3 deletion was characterized in two ASD-affected siblings from
another collection, which brings the total number of published mutations in
unrelated ASD-affected families to seven. The combined data provide support that 
haploinsufficiency of SHANK3 can cause a monogenic form of autism in sufficient
frequency to warrant consideration in clinical diagnostic testing.

PMCID: PMC2276348
PMID: 17999366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Feb 1;17(3):458-65. Epub 2007 Nov 6.

Comparative genome hybridization suggests a role for NRXN1 and APBA2 in
schizophrenia.

Kirov G(1), Gumus D, Chen W, Norton N, Georgieva L, Sari M, O'Donovan MC, Erdogan
F, Owen MJ, Ropers HH, Ullmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Henry Wellcome
Building, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

Copy number variations (CNVs) account for a substantial proportion of human
genomic variation, and have been shown to cause neurodevelopmental disorders. We 
sought to determine the relevance of CNVs to the aetiology of schizophrenia (SZ).
Whole-genome, high-resolution, tiling path BAC array comparative genomic
hybridization (array CGH) was employed to test DNA from 93 individuals with
DSM-IV SZ. Common DNA copy number changes that are unlikely to be directly
pathogenic in SZ were filtered out by comparison to a reference dataset of 372
control individuals analyzed in our laboratory, and a screen against the Database
of Genomic Variants. The remaining aberrations were validated with Affymetrix
250K SNP arrays or 244K Agilent oligo-arrays and tested for inheritance from the 
parents. A total of 13 aberrations satisfied our criteria. Two of them are very
likely to be pathogenic. The first one is a deletion at 2p16.3 that was present
in an affected sibling and disrupts NRXN1. The second one is a de novo
duplication at 15q13.1 spanning APBA2. The proteins of these two genes interact
directly and play a role in synaptic development and function. Both genes have
been affected by CNVs in patients with autism and mental retardation, but neither
has been previously implicated in SZ.

PMID: 17989066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Oct 15;143A(20):2452-9.

An innocuous duplication of 11.2 Mb at 13q21 is gene poor: sub-bands of gene
paucity and pervasive CNV characterize the chromosome anomalies.

Daniel A(1), Darmanian A, Peters G, Goodwin L, Hort JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, Western Sydney Genetics Program, The Children's
Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, Australia. artd@chw.edu.au

A boy with autistic spectrum disorder without dysmorphisms was found to have a
chromosome duplication of part of band 13q21. His mother and grandfather both of 
normal intellect had the same chromosomal duplication. Comparison was made with
the Chromosome anomaly database
www.som.soton.ac.uk/research/geneticsdiv/anomaly%20register which revealed
similar cases. Mapping on DNA microarray for the proband and mother showed the
duplication to be of length 11.2 Mb, encompassing the 13q21.1-13q21.32 region.
The duplicated region is profoundly gene poor, with a mean gene density of 0.45
genes/Mb. We estimate, that the mean gene density in the sub-bands of the
chromosome anomalies is 2.4-2.5 genes/Mb. In addition the percentages of the
sub-bands reported as copy number variants (CNV) was estimated from the Database 
of Chromosome Genomic Variants (http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/). It was found
that for some of these sub-bands, gene paucity was likely to be a major
contributor to their innocuous phenotypic effect, for example, the gene densities
were for: 1p31.2 (1.25 genes/Mb); 2p12 (1.7); 4p15.31 (1.3); 5p14.1 (0.22);
5p14.3 (0.8); 5q21.2 (0.6); 5q21.3 (1.2); 8p23.2 (0.25); 13q21.1 (0.9); 14q31.1
(1.4); 18q22.1 (1.4); 21q21.1 (1.2); and 21q21.2 (0.7). For other sub-bands the
percentage of the band in which CNV have been reported was found to be markedly
increased, for example, 8p23.2 (94.7% of the band is defined by reported CNV);
3p26.3 (81.6); 5p14.3 (59.3); 8p22 (48.8); 2p12 (44.0); 5q21.1 (43.6); 6q24.2
(41.4); 9p23 (38.8); 10q21.1 (36.5); 5q21.2 (35.4), and 11q14.3 (33.8). We argue 
that both gene paucity and pervasive CNV are major indicators of bands conforming
to the Chromosome Anomaly phenomenon.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17853472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2007 Jul;7(4):371-93.

Recent development in pharmacogenomics: from candidate genes to genome-wide
association studies.

Grant SF(1), Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA
19104-4318, USA. grants@chop.edu

Genetic diversity, most notably through single nucleotide polymorphisms and
copy-number variation, together with specific environmental exposures,
contributes to both disease susceptibility and drug response variability. It has 
proved difficult to isolate disease genes that confer susceptibility to complex
disorders, and as a consequence, even fewer genetic variants that influence
clinical drug responsiveness have been uncovered. As such, the candidate gene
approach has largely failed to deliver and, although the family-based linkage
approach has certain theoretical advantages in dealing with common/complex
disorders, progress has been slower than was hoped. More recently, genome-wide
association studies have gained increasing popularity, as they enable scientists 
to robustly associate specific variants with the predisposition for complex
disease, such as age-related macular degeneration, Type 2 diabetes, inflammatory 
bowel disease, obesity, autism and leukemia. This relatively new methodology has 
stirred new hope for the mapping of genes that regulate drug response related to 
these conditions. Collectively, these studies support the notion that modern
high-throughput single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping technologies, when
applied to large and comprehensively phenotyped patient cohorts, will readily
reveal the most clinically relevant disease-modifying and drug response genes.
This review addresses both recent advances in the genotyping field and highlights
from genome-wide association studies, which have conclusively uncovered variants 
that underlie disease susceptibility and/or variability in drug response in
common disorders.

PMID: 17620046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Aug;20(2):225-31.

Gene amplifications at chromosome 7 of the human gastric cancer genome.

Yang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Metastasis Research Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul 120-752, Korea. ysh@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

Genetic aberrations at chromosome 7 are known to be related with diverse human
diseases, including cancer and autism. In a number of cancer research areas
involving gastric cancer, several comparative genomic hybridization studies
employing metaphase chromosome or BAC clone microarrays have repeatedly
identified human chromosome 7 as containing 'regions of changes' related with
cancer progression. cDNA microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization can
be used to directly identify individual target genes undergoing copy number
variations. Copy number change analysis for 17,000 genes on a microarray format
was performed with tumor and normal gastric tissues from 30 patients. A group of 
90 genes undergoing copy number increases (gene amplification) at the p11
approximately p22 or q21 approximately q36 region of chromosome 7 is reported.
The list of genes includes wingless-type MMTV integration site family member 2
(WNT2), a proto-oncogene and acyloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) that was amplified in
>80% of the tested cases. The amplified genes are those functioning in the
biological processes such as signal transduction pathways, cell proliferation,
metabolism, transport, inflammatory response and protein folding or proteolysis. 
Also found in the list are genes that are targets for drug development, such as
maltase-glucoamylase (MGAM), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), neuropeptide Y
(NPY) and dopa decarboxylase (DDC). The current dataset can be used as one of the
resources in understanding genetic aberrations of chromosome 7 in human gastric
cancer.

PMID: 17611641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS Genet. 2007 May 4;3(5):e65. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Identification of the imprinted KLF14 transcription factor undergoing
human-specific accelerated evolution.

Parker-Katiraee L(1), Carson AR, Yamada T, Arnaud P, Feil R, Abu-Amero SN, Moore 
GE, Kaneda M, Perry GH, Stone AC, Lee C, Meguro-Horike M, Sasaki H, Kobayashi K, 
Nakabayashi K, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Imprinted genes are expressed in a parent-of-origin manner and are located in
clusters throughout the genome. Aberrations in the expression of imprinted genes 
on human Chromosome 7 have been suggested to play a role in the etiologies of
Russell-Silver Syndrome and autism. We describe the imprinting of KLF14, an
intronless member of the Kruppel-like family of transcription factors located at 
Chromosome 7q32. We show that it has monoallelic maternal expression in all
embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues studied, in both human and mouse. We
examine epigenetic modifications in the KLF14 CpG island in both species and find
this region to be hypomethylated. In addition, we perform chromatin
immunoprecipitation and find that the murine Klf14 CpG island lacks
allele-specific histone modifications. Despite the absence of these defining
features, our analysis of Klf14 in offspring from DNA methyltransferase 3a
conditional knockout mice reveals that the gene's expression is dependent upon a 
maternally methylated region. Due to the intronless nature of Klf14 and its
homology to Klf16, we suggest that the gene is an ancient retrotransposed copy of
Klf16. By sequence analysis of numerous species, we place the timing of this
event after the divergence of Marsupialia, yet prior to the divergence of the
Xenarthra superclade. We identify a large number of sequence variants in KLF14
and, using several measures of diversity, we determine that there is greater
variability in the human lineage with a significantly increased number of
nonsynonymous changes, suggesting human-specific accelerated evolution. Thus,
KLF14 may be the first example of an imprinted transcript undergoing accelerated 
evolution in the human lineage.

PMCID: PMC1865561
PMID: 17480121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Science. 2007 Apr 20;316(5823):445-9. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Strong association of de novo copy number mutations with autism.

Sebat J(1), Lakshmi B, Malhotra D, Troge J, Lese-Martin C, Walsh T, Yamrom B,
Yoon S, Krasnitz A, Kendall J, Leotta A, Pai D, Zhang R, Lee YH, Hicks J, Spence 
SJ, Lee AT, Puura K, Lehtimaki T, Ledbetter D, Gregersen PK, Bregman J, Sutcliffe
JS, Jobanputra V, Chung W, Warburton D, King MC, Skuse D, Geschwind DH, Gilliam
TC, Ye K, Wigler M.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA. sebat@cshl.edu

We tested the hypothesis that de novo copy number variation (CNV) is associated
with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). We performed comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) on the genomic DNA of patients and unaffected subjects to
detect copy number variants not present in their respective parents. Candidate
genomic regions were validated by higher-resolution CGH, paternity testing,
cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and microsatellite genotyping. 
Confirmed de novo CNVs were significantly associated with autism (P = 0.0005).
Such CNVs were identified in 12 out of 118 (10%) of patients with sporadic
autism, in 2 out of 77 (3%) of patients with an affected first-degree relative,
and in 2 out of 196 (1%) of controls. Most de novo CNVs were smaller than
microscopic resolution. Affected genomic regions were highly heterogeneous and
included mutations of single genes. These findings establish de novo germline
mutation as a more significant risk factor for ASD than previously recognized.

PMCID: PMC2993504
PMID: 17363630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Mar 1;146A(5):636-43.

Duplication of 17(p11.2p11.2) in a male child with autism and severe language
delay.

Nakamine A(1), Ouchanov L, Jimenez P, Manghi ER, Esquivel M, Monge S, Fallas M,
Burton BK, Szomju B, Elsea SH, Marshall CR, Scherer SW, McInnes LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, 
USA.

Duplications of 17(p11.2p11.2) have been associated with various behavioral
manifestations including attention deficits, obsessive-compulsive symptoms,
autistic traits, and language delay. We are conducting a genetic study of autism 
and are screening all cases for submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities, in
addition to standard karyotyping, and fragile X testing. Using array-based
comparative genomic hybridization analysis of data from the Affymetrix
GeneChip(R) Human Mapping Array set, we detected a duplication of approximately
3.3 Mb on chromosome 17p11.2 in a male child with autism and severe expressive
language delay. The duplication was confirmed by measuring the copy number of
genomic DNA using quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Gene expression
analyses revealed increased expression of three candidate genes for the
Smith-Magenis neurobehavioral phenotype, RAI1, DRG2, and RASD1, in transformed
lymphocytes from Case 81A, suggesting gene dosage effects. Our results add to a
growing body of evidence suggesting that duplications of 17(p11.2p11.2) result in
language delay as well as autism and related phenotypes. As Smith-Magenis
syndrome is also associated with language delay, a gene involved in acquisition
of language may lie within this interval. Whether a parent of origin effect,
gender of the case, the presence of allelic variation, or changes in expression
of genes outside the breakpoints influence the resultant phenotype remains to be 
determined.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17334992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nat Genet. 2007 Mar;39(3):319-28. Epub 2007 Feb 18.

Mapping autism risk loci using genetic linkage and chromosomal rearrangements.

Autism Genome Project Consortium, Szatmari P, Paterson AD, Zwaigenbaum L, Roberts
W, Brian J, Liu XQ, Vincent JB, Skaug JL, Thompson AP, Senman L, Feuk L, Qian C, 
Bryson SE, Jones MB, Marshall CR, Scherer SW, Vieland VJ, Bartlett C, Mangin LV, 
Goedken R, Segre A, Pericak-Vance MA, Cuccaro ML, Gilbert JR, Wright HH, Abramson
RK, Betancur C, Bourgeron T, Gillberg C, Leboyer M, Buxbaum JD, Davis KL,
Hollander E, Silverman JM, Hallmayer J, Lotspeich L, Sutcliffe JS, Haines JL,
Folstein SE, Piven J, Wassink TH, Sheffield V, Geschwind DH, Bucan M, Brown WT,
Cantor RM, Constantino JN, Gilliam TC, Herbert M, Lajonchere C, Ledbetter DH,
Lese-Martin C, Miller J, Nelson S, Samango-Sprouse CA, Spence S, State M, Tanzi
RE, Coon H, Dawson G, Devlin B, Estes A, Flodman P, Klei L, McMahon WM, Minshew
N, Munson J, Korvatska E, Rodier PM, Schellenberg GD, Smith M, Spence MA,
Stodgell C, Tepper PG, Wijsman EM, Yu CE, Roge B, Mantoulan C, Wittemeyer K,
Poustka A, Felder B, Klauck SM, Schuster C, Poustka F, Bolte S, Feineis-Matthews 
S, Herbrecht E, Schmotzer G, Tsiantis J, Papanikolaou K, Maestrini E, Bacchelli
E, Blasi F, Carone S, Toma C, Van Engeland H, de Jonge M, Kemner C, Koop F,
Langemeijer M, Hijmans C, Staal WG, Baird G, Bolton PF, Rutter ML, Weisblatt E,
Green J, Aldred C, Wilkinson JA, Pickles A, Le Couteur A, Berney T, McConachie H,
Bailey AJ, Francis K, Honeyman G, Hutchinson A, Parr JR, Wallace S, Monaco AP,
Barnby G, Kobayashi K, Lamb JA, Sousa I, Sykes N, Cook EH, Guter SJ, Leventhal
BL, Salt J, Lord C, Corsello C, Hus V, Weeks DE, Volkmar F, Tauber M, Fombonne E,
Shih A, Meyer KJ.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2007 Oct;39(10):1285. Meyer, Kacie J [added]; Koop, Frederike
[corrected to Koop, Frederieke]; Langemeijer, Marjolijn [corrected to
Langemeijer, Marjolein]; Hijimans, Channa [corrected to Hijmans, Channa].

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are common, heritable neurodevelopmental
conditions. The genetic architecture of ASDs is complex, requiring large samples 
to overcome heterogeneity. Here we broaden coverage and sample size relative to
other studies of ASDs by using Affymetrix 10K SNP arrays and 1,181 [corrected]
families with at least two affected individuals, performing the largest linkage
scan to date while also analyzing copy number variation in these families.
Linkage and copy number variation analyses implicate chromosome 11p12-p13 and
neurexins, respectively, among other candidate loci. Neurexins team with
previously implicated neuroligins for glutamatergic synaptogenesis, highlighting 
glutamate-related genes as promising candidates for contributing to ASDs.

PMID: 17322880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Immunol. 2009 Apr;131(1):24-30. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.11.002. Epub 2008
Dec 20.

Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) and attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) associated with a Coronin-1A mutation and a chromosome 16p11.2
deletion.

Shiow LR(1), Paris K, Akana MC, Cyster JG, Sorensen RU, Puck JM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0519,
USA.

Defects causing severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) have been reported in
pathways mediating antigen receptor rearrangement, antigen receptor and cytokine 
signaling, and purine metabolism. Recognizing that the actin regulator Coronin-1A
is essential for development of a normal peripheral T cell compartment in mouse
models, we identified absence of Coronin-1A in a girl with T-B+NK+ SCID who
suffered recurrent infections including severe post-vaccination varicella at age 
13 months. Murine Coronin-1A is essential for the release of T cells from the
thymus, consistent with the paradoxically detectable thymus in our patient.
Molecular analysis revealed a 2 bp deletion in the paternal CORO1A coding
sequence paired with a 600 kb de novo deletion encompassing CORO1A on the
maternal allele. This genomic region at 16p11.2 is subject to recurrent copy
number variations associated with autism spectrum disorders, including attention 
deficit and hyperactivity, present in our patient. This case highlights the first
link between actin cytoskeleton regulation and SCID.

PMCID: PMC2692687
PMID: 19097825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Hum Mutat. 2009 Mar;30(3):371-8. doi: 10.1002/humu.20863.

SNP array mapping of chromosome 20p deletions: genotypes, phenotypes, and copy
number variation.

Kamath BM(1), Thiel BD, Gai X, Conlin LK, Munoz PS, Glessner J, Clark D, Warthen 
DM, Shaikh TH, Mihci E, Piccoli DA, Grant SF, Hakonarson H, Krantz ID, Spinner
NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The use of array technology to define chromosome deletions and duplications is
bringing us closer to establishing a genotype/phenotype map of genomic copy
number alterations. We studied 21 patients and five relatives with deletions of
the short arm of chromosome 20 using the Illumina HumanHap550 SNP array to: 1)
more accurately determine the deletion sizes; 2) identify and compare
breakpoints; 3) establish genotype/phenotype correlations; and 4) investigate the
use of the HumanHap550 platform for analysis of chromosome deletions. Deletions
ranged from 95 kb to 14.62 Mb, and all of the breakpoints were unique. Eleven
patients had deletions between 95 kb and 4 Mb and these individuals had normal
development, with no anomalies outside of those associated with Alagille syndrome
(AGS). The proximal and distal boundaries of these 11 deletions constitute a
5.4-Mb region, and we propose that haploinsufficiency for only 1 of the 12 genes 
in this region causes phenotypic abnormalities. This defines the JAG1-associated 
critical region, in which deletions do not confer findings other than those
associated with AGS. The other 10 patients had deletions between 3.28 Mb and
14.62 Mb, which extended outside the critical region, and, notably, all of these 
patients had developmental delay. This group had other findings such as autism,
scoliosis, and bifid uvula. We identified 47 additional polymorphic genome-wide
copy number variants (>20 SNPs), with 0 to 5 variants called per patient.
Deletions of the short arm of chromosome 20 are associated with relatively mild
and limited clinical anomalies. The use of SNP arrays provides accurate
high-resolution definition of genomic abnormalities.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2650004
PMID: 19058200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Harv Ment Health Lett. 2008 Oct;25(4):6-7.

Copy number variation: the new genetic frontier. A new theory about why
psychiatric disorders are so heterogeneous.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 19024765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Schizophr Bull. 2009 Jan;35(1):9-12. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn147. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Copy number variation and schizophrenia.

St Clair D(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical Science, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD.
mmbl@bigpond.com

Over the last 12 months, a series of major articles have reported associations
with schizophrenia of copy number variants at 1q21, 15q11.2, 15q13.3, 16p11.2,
22q12, and Neurexin 1 loci. These are rare high-penetrant mutations that increase
risk not only of schizophrenia but also of a range of other psychiatric disorders
including autism and mental retardation. In some cases, the same phenotype can
occur irrespective of whether the copy number variant causes a deletion or
duplication. Some of these mutations occur at very high rates in human
populations, but because of reduced fecundity associated with major psychiatric
disorders the overall frequency in the population remains low. These new findings
raise fundamental clinical and scientific questions concerning classification of 
major neuropsychiatric disorders, modes of inheritance, diagnostics, and genetic 
counseling. Although the loci identified so far account for only a small
proportion of cases, many more are likely to be discovered over the next few
years. A major focus of research will be to identify the key, the genetic and
environmental determinants of schizophrenia risk in carriers of these copy number
variants, and to discover whether their rates of mutation are unstable or fixed.

PMCID: PMC2643970
PMID: 18990708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nature. 2008 Oct 16;455(7215):919-23. doi: 10.1038/nature07458.

Copy-number variations associated with neuropsychiatric conditions.

Cook EH Jr(1), Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Juvenile Research, Department of Psychiatry, University of
Illinois, 1747 West Roosevelt Road, Chicago, Illinois 60608, USA.

Neuropsychiatric conditions such as autism and schizophrenia have long been
attributed to genetic alterations, but identifying the genes responsible has
proved challenging. Microarray experiments have now revealed abundant copy-number
variation--a type of variation in which stretches of DNA are duplicated, deleted 
and sometimes rearranged--in the human population. Genes affected by copy-number 
variation are good candidates for research into disease susceptibility. The
complexity of neuropsychiatric genetics, however, dictates that assessment of the
biomedical relevance of copy-number variants and the genes that they affect needs
to be considered in an integrated context.

PMID: 18923514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nature. 2008 Oct 16;455(7215):912-8. doi: 10.1038/nature07457.

Failure of neuronal homeostasis results in common neuropsychiatric phenotypes.

Ramocki MB(1), Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental
Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, MS 225, BCMT-T807,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. mramocki@bcm.tmc.edu

Failure of normal brain development leads to mental retardation or autism in
about 3% of children. Many genes integral to pathways by which synaptic
modification and the remodelling of neuronal networks mediate cognitive and
social development have been identified, usually through loss of function.
Evidence is accumulating, however, that either loss or gain of molecular
functions can be deleterious to the nervous system. Copy-number variation,
regulation of gene expression by non-coding RNAs and epigenetic changes are all
mechanisms by which altered gene dosage can cause the failure of neuronal
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2696622
PMID: 18923513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Neurobiol Dis. 2010 May;38(2):181-91. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.08.011. Epub 2008
Sep 18.

The comorbidity of autism with the genomic disorders of chromosome 15q11.2-q13.

Hogart A(1), Wu D, LaSalle JM, Schanen NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California,
Davis, CA 95616, USA.

A cluster of low copy repeats on the proximal long arm of chromosome 15 mediates 
various forms of stereotyped deletions and duplication events that cause a group 
of neurodevelopmental disorders that are associated with autism or autism
spectrum disorders (ASD). The region is subject to genomic imprinting and the
behavioral phenotypes associated with the chromosome 15q11.2-q13 disorders show a
parent-of-origin specific effect that suggests that an increased copy number of
maternally derived alleles contributes to autism susceptibility. Notably,
nonimprinted, biallelically expressed genes within the interval also have been
shown to be misexpressed in brains of patients with chromosome 15q11.2-q13
genomic disorders, indicating that they also likely play a role in the phenotypic
outcome. This review provides an overview of the phenotypes of these disorders
and their relationships with ASD and outlines the regional genes that may
contribute to the autism susceptibility imparted by copy number variation of the 
region.

Copyright 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2884398
PMID: 18840528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 29;3(8):e3104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003104.

Small deletion variants have stable breakpoints commonly associated with alu
elements.

de Smith AJ(1), Walters RG, Coin LJ, Steinfeld I, Yakhini Z, Sladek R, Froguel P,
Blakemore AI.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Genomic Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, United Kingdom.

Copy number variants (CNVs) contribute significantly to human genomic variation, 
with over 5000 loci reported, covering more than 18% of the euchromatic human
genome. Little is known, however, about the origin and stability of variants of
different size and complexity. We investigated the breakpoints of 20 small,
common deletions, representing a subset of those originally identified by array
CGH, using Agilent microarrays, in 50 healthy French Caucasian subjects. By
sequencing PCR products amplified using primers designed to span the deleted
regions, we determined the exact size and genomic position of the deletions in
all affected samples. For each deletion studied, all individuals carrying the
deletion share identical upstream and downstream breakpoints at the sequence
level, suggesting that the deletion event occurred just once and later became
common in the population. This is supported by linkage disequilibrium (LD)
analysis, which has revealed that most of the deletions studied are in moderate
to strong LD with surrounding SNPs, and have conserved long-range haplotypes.
Analysis of the sequences flanking the deletion breakpoints revealed an
enrichment of microhomology at the breakpoint junctions. More significantly, we
found an enrichment of Alu repeat elements, the overwhelming majority of which
intersected deletion breakpoints at their poly-A tails. We found no enrichment of
LINE elements or segmental duplications, in contrast to other reports. Sequence
analysis revealed enrichment of a conserved motif in the sequences surrounding
the deletion breakpoints, although whether this motif has any mechanistic role in
the formation of some deletions has yet to be determined. Considered together
with existing information on more complex inherited variant regions, and reports 
of de novo variants associated with autism, these data support the presence of
different subgroups of CNV in the genome which may have originated through
different mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2518860
PMID: 18769679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Pharmacogenomics. 2008 Aug;9(8):1143-54. doi: 10.2217/14622416.9.8.1143.

Copy-number variations associated with autism spectrum disorder.

Kakinuma H(1), Sato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1 Uchinada,
Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa 920-293, Japan. p-kaki@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a clinically heterogeneous developmental
disorder with a strong genetic component. Rare genetic disorders and various
chromosomal abnormalities are thought to account for approximately 10% of people 
with ASD. The etiology of the remaining cases remains unknown. Recent advances in
array-based technology have increased the resolution in detecting submicroscopic 
deletions and duplications, referred to as copy-number variations. ASD-associated
copy-number variations, which are considered to be present in individuals with
ASD but not in unaffected individuals, have been extensively investigated. These 
data will provide us with an opportunity not only to search for genes causing or 
contributing to ASDs but also to understand the genetics of ASD.

PMID: 18681787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;Chapter 8:Unit 8.12. doi:
10.1002/0471142905.hg0812s58.

Oligonucleotide microarrays for clinical diagnosis of copy number variation.

Miller DT(1), Shen Y, Wu BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Detection of genomic copy number variation is now considered the standard of care
in the evaluation of children with developmental delay, and is used for other
clinical indications such as multiple congenital anomalies and autism spectrum
disorders. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was the first molecular
method for detection of submicroscopic genomic copy number variation, but
microarray based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) offers several
advantages as an adjunct to traditional cytogenetic methods such as karyotype and
FISH. This unit focuses on oligonucleotide arrays, but includes background
information on basic differences between oligonucleotide arrays and bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) arrays. Array sensitivity is influenced by probe
coverage or density, probe location, and choice of oligo array formats (i.e.,
targeted versus whole genome). Array platform influences the likelihood of
detecting variants of unknown significance. Clinical interpretation of such
variants is discussed.

Copyright 2008 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 18633976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Jun 4;9:261. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-261.

Probe-specific mixed-model approach to detect copy number differences using
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA).

Gonzalez JR(1), Carrasco JL, Armengol L, Villatoro S, Jover L, Yasui Y, Estivill 
X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for research in environmental epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, Spain.
jrgonzalez@imim.es

BACKGROUND: MLPA method is a potentially useful semi-quantitative method to
detect copy number alterations in targeted regions. In this paper, we propose a
method for the normalization procedure based on a non-linear mixed-model, as well
as a new approach for determining the statistical significance of altered probes 
based on linear mixed-model. This method establishes a threshold by using
different tolerance intervals that accommodates the specific random error
variability observed in each test sample.
RESULTS: Through simulation studies we have shown that our proposed method
outperforms two existing methods that are based on simple threshold rules or
iterative regression. We have illustrated the method using a controlled MLPA
assay in which targeted regions are variable in copy number in individuals
suffering from different disorders such as Prader-Willi, DiGeorge or Autism
showing the best performace.
CONCLUSION: Using the proposed mixed-model, we are able to determine thresholds
to decide whether a region is altered. These threholds are specific for each
individual, incorporating experimental variability, resulting in improved
sensitivity and specificity as the examples with real data have revealed.

PMCID: PMC2492880
PMID: 18522760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Neuron. 2008 Apr 24;58(2):165-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.007.

Schizophrenia: genome, interrupted.

Cantor RM(1), Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Structural chromosomal variation is increasingly recognized as an important
contributor to human diseases, particularly those of neurodevelopment, such as
autism. A current paper makes a significant advance to schizophrenia genetics by 
establishing an association with rare copy number variants (CNV), which are
over-represented in neurodevelopmental genes.

PMID: 18439401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nat Rev Genet. 2008 May;9(5):341-55. doi: 10.1038/nrg2346.

Advances in autism genetics: on the threshold of a new neurobiology.

Abrahams BS(1), Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Department, and Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Behaviour,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90095-1769 USA. brett.abrahams@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2008 Jun;9(6):493.

Autism is a heterogeneous syndrome defined by impairments in three core domains: 
social interaction, language and range of interests. Recent work has led to the
identification of several autism susceptibility genes and an increased
appreciation of the contribution of de novo and inherited copy number variation. 
Promising strategies are also being applied to identify common genetic risk
variants. Systems biology approaches, including array-based expression profiling,
are poised to provide additional insights into this group of disorders, in which 
heterogeneity, both genetic and phenotypic, is emerging as a dominant theme.

PMCID: PMC2756414
PMID: 18414403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Jun 15;63(12):1111-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.01.009. 
Epub 2008 Mar 28.

Novel submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities detected in autism spectrum
disorder.

Christian SL(1), Brune CW, Sudi J, Kumar RA, Liu S, Karamohamed S, Badner JA,
Matsui S, Conroy J, McQuaid D, Gergel J, Hatchwell E, Gilliam TC, Gershon ES,
Nowak NJ, Dobyns WB, Cook EH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
schrist@bsd.uchicago.edu

BACKGROUND: One genetic mechanism known to be associated with autism spectrum
disorders (ASD) is chromosomal abnormalities. The identification of copy number
variants (CNV), i.e., microdeletions and microduplications that are undetectable 
at the level of traditional cytogenetic analysis, allows the potential
association of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances and human disease.
METHODS: We performed array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) utilizing a 
19K whole genome tiling path bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) microarray on 
397 unrelated subjects with autism spectrum disorder. Common CNV were excluded
using a control group comprised of 372 individuals from the National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) Genetics Initiative Control samples. Confirmation studies
were performed on all remaining CNV using fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), microsatellite analysis, and/or quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 51 CNV were confirmed in 46 ASD subjects. Three maternal
interstitial duplications of 15q11-q13 known to be associated with ASD were
identified. The other 48 CNV ranged in size from 189 kilobase (kb) to 5.5
megabase (Mb) and contained from 0 to approximately 40 National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Reference Sequence (RefSeq) genes. Seven CNV
were de novo and 44 were inherited.
CONCLUSIONS: Fifty-one autism-specific CNV were identified in 46 of 397 ASD
patients using a 19K BAC microarray for an overall rate of 11.6%. These
microdeletions and microduplications cause gene dosage imbalance in 272 genes,
many of which could be considered as candidate genes for autism.

PMCID: PMC2440346
PMID: 18374305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Expert Opin Med Diagn. 2008 Apr;2(4):417-28. doi: 10.1517/17530059.2.4.417.

Copy number variation in the autism genome.

Feuk L(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, 101
College Street, MaRS - East Tower, Rm 14-701, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada +1 416 
813 7654 ext 1358 ; +1 416 813 8319 ; lfeuk@sickkids.ca.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are among the most heritable of all 
neurodevelopmental disorders. Despite intense research there has been limited
success in deciphering the etiology of ASDs.
OBJECTIVE: It has been shown that chromosomal rearrangements play an important
role in ASDs. The recent development of techniques to screen the genome for
genetic variation at ever-higher resolution has led to some crucial discoveries
over the last year. This progress is described and discussed.
METHODS: This review provides an overview of genetic variation studies in ASD,
with a focus on structural genetic variation.
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Screening for copy number variation is an important approach 
in ASD research. With the introduction of next-generation sequencing, the pace of
ASD genetics will increase in the near future.

PMID: 23495708  [PubMed]


16. J Med Genet. 2009 Mar;46(3):176-82. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.057505. Epub 2008 Mar
18.

Disruption of contactin 4 in three subjects with autism spectrum disorder.

Roohi J, Montagna C, Tegay DH, Palmer LE, DeVincent C, Pomeroy JC, Christian SL, 
Nowak N, Hatchwell E.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder of the
central nervous system of largely unknown aetiology. The prevalence of the
syndrome underscores the need for biological markers and a clearer understanding 
of pathogenesis. For these reasons, a genetic study of idiopathic ASD was
undertaken.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Array based comparative genomic hybridisation identified a
paternally inherited chromosome 3 copy number variation (CNV) in three
SUBJECTS: a deletion in two siblings and a duplication in a third, unrelated
individual. These variations were fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH)
validated and the end points further delineated using a custom fine tiling
oligonucleotide array. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products unique to the
rearrangements were amplified and sequence analysis revealed the variations to
have resulted from Alu Y mediated unequal recombinations interrupting contactin 4
(CNTN4).
CONCLUSION: CNTN4 plays an essential role in the formation, maintenance, and
plasticity of neuronal networks. Disruption of this gene is known to cause
developmental delay and mental retardation. This report suggests that mutations
affecting CNTN4 function may be relevant to ASD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2643049
PMID: 18349135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;82(2):477-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.12.009. Epub 2008
Jan 17.

Structural variation of chromosomes in autism spectrum disorder.

Marshall CR(1), Noor A, Vincent JB, Lionel AC, Feuk L, Skaug J, Shago M, Moessner
R, Pinto D, Ren Y, Thiruvahindrapduram B, Fiebig A, Schreiber S, Friedman J,
Ketelaars CE, Vos YJ, Ficicioglu C, Kirkpatrick S, Nicolson R, Sloman L, Summers 
A, Gibbons CA, Teebi A, Chitayat D, Weksberg R, Thompson A, Vardy C, Crosbie V,
Luscombe S, Baatjes R, Zwaigenbaum L, Roberts W, Fernandez B, Szatmari P, Scherer
SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of
Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, 
Canada.

Structural variation (copy number variation [CNV] including deletion and
duplication, translocation, inversion) of chromosomes has been identified in some
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but the full etiologic role is
unknown. We performed genome-wide assessment for structural abnormalities in 427 
unrelated ASD cases via single-nucleotide polymorphism microarrays and
karyotyping. With microarrays, we discovered 277 unbalanced CNVs in 44% of ASD
families not present in 500 controls (and re-examined in another 1152 controls). 
Karyotyping detected additional balanced changes. Although most variants were
inherited, we found a total of 27 cases with de novo alterations, and in three
(11%) of these individuals, two or more new variants were observed. De novo CNVs 
were found in approximately 7% and approximately 2% of idiopathic families having
one child, or two or more ASD siblings, respectively. We also detected 13 loci
with recurrent/overlapping CNV in unrelated cases, and at these sites, deletions 
and duplications affecting the same gene(s) in different individuals and
sometimes in asymptomatic carriers were also found. Notwithstanding complexities,
our results further implicate the SHANK3-NLGN4-NRXN1 postsynaptic density genes
and also identify novel loci at DPP6-DPP10-PCDH9 (synapse complex), ANKRD11,
DPYD, PTCHD1, 15q24, among others, for a role in ASD susceptibility. Our most
compelling result discovered CNV at 16p11.2 (p = 0.002) (with characteristics of 
a genomic disorder) at approximately 1% frequency. Some of the ASD regions were
also common to mental retardation loci. Structural variants were found in
sufficiently high frequency influencing ASD to suggest that cytogenetic and
microarray analyses be considered in routine clinical workup.

PMCID: PMC2426913
PMID: 18252227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 14;358(7):667-75. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa075974. Epub 2008 Jan
9.

Association between microdeletion and microduplication at 16p11.2 and autism.

Weiss LA(1), Shen Y, Korn JM, Arking DE, Miller DT, Fossdal R, Saemundsen E,
Stefansson H, Ferreira MA, Green T, Platt OS, Ruderfer DM, Walsh CA, Altshuler D,
Chakravarti A, Tanzi RE, Stefansson K, Santangelo SL, Gusella JF, Sklar P, Wu BL,
Daly MJ; Autism Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Autism Consortium , Boston, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 14;358(7):737-9.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder is a heritable developmental disorder in
which chromosomal abnormalities are thought to play a role.
METHODS: As a first component of a genomewide association study of families from 
the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE), we used two novel algorithms to
search for recurrent copy-number variations in genotype data from 751 multiplex
families with autism. Specific recurrent de novo events were further evaluated in
clinical-testing data from Children's Hospital Boston and in a large population
study in Iceland.
RESULTS: Among the AGRE families, we observed five instances of a de novo
deletion of 593 kb on chromosome 16p11.2. Using comparative genomic
hybridization, we observed the identical deletion in 5 of 512 children referred
to Children's Hospital Boston for developmental delay, mental retardation, or
suspected autism spectrum disorder, as well as in 3 of 299 persons with autism in
an Icelandic population; the deletion was also carried by 2 of 18,834 unscreened 
Icelandic control subjects. The reciprocal duplication of this region occurred in
7 affected persons in AGRE families and 4 of the 512 children from Children's
Hospital Boston. The duplication also appeared to be a high-penetrance risk
factor.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel, recurrent microdeletion and a reciprocal
microduplication that carry substantial susceptibility to autism and appear to
account for approximately 1% of cases. We did not identify other regions with
similar aggregations of large de novo mutations.

Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 18184952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Sep 5;147B(6):973-5. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30663.

Variation in GABA-A subunit gene copy number in an autistic patient with mosaic 4
p duplication (p12p16).

Kakinuma H(1), Ozaki M, Sato H, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan.
p-kaki@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

Autism has been associated with chromosomal aberrations, including duplications
at chromosome 4, and the identification of genetic factors contributing to the
etiology of this disease is the focus of much research. Here we report a Japanese
girl with mosaic of chromosome 4p duplication, mos
46,XX,dup(4)(p12p16)[54]/46,XX[6], who was diagnosed with autism at 3 years of
age. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with probes covering the region
spanning a cluster of the gamma aminobutyric acid A (GABA-A) receptor subunit
genes in the proximal short arm of chromosome 4 demonstrated total three signals 
for the GABRG1, GABRA4, and GABRA2 genes, but only two signals for GABRB1. This
suggests that aberrant copy number of the GABA-A receptor subunit genes may
contribute to the etiology of autism in this patient.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18163449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;123(1-4):79-87. doi: 10.1159/000184694. Epub 2009 Mar 
11.

Putatively benign copy number variants in subjects with idiopathic autism
spectrum disorder and/or intellectual disability.

Qiao Y(1), Harvard C, Riendeau N, Fawcett C, Liu X, Holden JJ, Lewis ME,
Rajcan-Separovic E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UBC, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Putatively benign copy number variants (bCNVs) can be broadly defined as DNA copy
number gains or losses that do not lead to a recognizable clinical phenotype.
Detection of bCNVs in genomes of clinically healthy individuals is increasing
with the widespread use of whole genome arrays of different resolutions and the
use of sequence comparison methods. However, the role of bCNVs in human disease
susceptibility and phenotype diversity is mostly unknown. In order to explore a
potential role of bCNVs in the susceptibility to and/or pathogenesis of human
neurodevelopmental disorders we examined the frequency and type of common bCNVs
(detected in >/=2 independent control studies) amongst 221 subjects with an
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and/or intellectual disability (ID) in comparison 
to 40 controls using three array platforms of increasing resolution (Spectral
Genomics (1 Mb), Agilent (0.03 Mb) and NimbleGen (0.01 Mb)). We determined that
the number of bCNVs/subject, type and frequency of most common bCNVs were similar
for both the test and control cohorts when the same array platform was used. The 
comparison of the 'load' of bCNVs (i.e. number/subject) to a standardized metric 
of phenotypic features (see de Vries et al., 2001) in 91 ASD subjects revealed
that a phenotype score >/=4 is significantly more common (P < 0.05) in persons
with an ASD having one or more bCNVs via 1 Mb array-CGH, whereas individuals
without any recognizable bCNVs are significantly more likely to have a less
complex phenotype and a score </=3. Finally, we report 14 CNVs found amongst our 
ASD and ID cohorts that are infrequent in neurodevelopmentally normal controls
and are of familial origin, thus comprising rare CNVs of unknown significance.
Two of these rare familial bCNVs revealed variation in size when transmitted from
parent to child, indicating genomic instability. The ongoing discovery and
correlation of the pathogenic versus putatively benign underpinnings of the human
genome, its inherent variability and potential gene, positional and epigenetic
influences will continue to improve our understanding of genome plasticity and
its influences on human neurodevelopmental disorders.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19287141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;123(1-4):54-64. doi: 10.1159/000184692. Epub 2009 Mar 
11.

CNV and nervous system diseases--what's new?

Gu W(1), Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Several new genomic disorders caused by copy number variation (CNV) of genes
whose dosage is critical for the physiological function of the nervous system
have been recently identified. Dup(7)(q11.23) patients carry duplications of the 
genomic region deleted in Williams-Beuren syndrome, they are characterized by
prominent speech delay. The phenotypes of Potocki-Lupski syndrome and MECP2
duplication syndrome were neuropsychologically examined in detail, which revealed
autism as an endophenotype and a prominent behavioral feature of these disorders.
Tandem duplication of LMNB1 was reported to cause adult-onset autosomal dominant 
leukodystrophy. PAFAH1B1/LIS1 and YWHAE, which were deleted in isolated
lissencephaly (PAFAH1B1/LIS1 alone) and Miller-Dieker syndrome (both genes), were
found to be duplicated in patients with developmental delay. Finally, two novel
microdeletion syndromes affecting 17q21.31 and 15q13.3, as well as their
reciprocal duplications, were also identified. In this review, we provide an
overview of the phenotypic manifestation of these syndromes and the
rearrangements causing them.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2920183
PMID: 19287139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;123(1-4):36-43. doi: 10.1159/000184690. Epub 2009 Mar 
11.

The role of rare structural variants in the genetics of autism spectrum
disorders.

Kusenda M(1), Sebat J.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA.

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impaired social
interaction and communication and restricted interests and behaviors. Despite
high estimates of heritability, genetic causes of ASD have long been elusive, due
in part to a high degree of genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity (Bailey et al., 
1995). Recently, important advances have been made in the genetics of ASD with
the use of new technologies for the direct detection of copy number variation
(CNV) in the human genome. CNV studies have revealed that de novo deletions and
duplications, typically less than 1 Mb in size, are strongly associated with ASD,
suggesting that spontaneous structural mutations play a more important role in
the etiology of disease than was previously recognized. Rare mutations have been 
identified at many different locations in the genome, and multiple 'hot spots'
have been identified where identical rearrangements recur with high frequency.
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that autism, like mental
retardation, is caused by a large number of individually rare mutations. These
studies serve as a model for how other emerging technologies for mutation
detection (e.g. next generation sequencing platforms) could be used to further
elucidate the role of rare sequence changes in ASD.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2920182
PMID: 19287137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Autism Res. 2009 Dec;2(6):359-64. doi: 10.1002/aur.107.

Copy number and sequence variants implicate APBA2 as an autism candidate gene.

Babatz TD(1), Kumar RA, Sudi J, Dobyns WB, Christian SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60637-5415, USA.

We recently reported an autistic proband and affected sibling with maternally
inherited microduplications within the 15q13.1 and 15q13.3 regions that contain a
total of 4 genes. The amyloid precursor protein-binding protein A2 (APBA2) gene
is located within the 15q13.1 duplication and encodes a neuronal adaptor protein 
essential to synaptic transmission that interacts directly with NRXN1 at the
presynaptic membrane. We interpreted this as evidence for a putative role of
APBA2 in autism as larger maternal duplications of 15q11-q13 are the most common 
known cause of autism. We therefore resequenced 512 subjects with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) and 463 controls, and identified 7 novel nonsynonymous coding
variants in ASD subjects compared with 4 in controls. Five of the seven variants 
in the ASD group were predicted to affect protein function, alter residues
conserved across 18 species, or both. All of the variants for which parental DNA 
was available were inherited. We also found two different nonsynonymous variants 
in two siblings with autism: (1) a paternally inherited heterozygous 6 bp
deletion and (2) a maternally inherited heterozygous missense mutation, the
latter also found in a single control. These results indicate compound
heterozygous mutations of APBA2 in this autism sibship. The co-occurrence of two 
nonsynonymous mutations in both affected siblings in a single family, each
transmitted from a different unaffected parent, suggest a role for APBA2
mutations in rare individuals with ASD.

PMID: 20029827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nature. 2010 Feb 4;463(7281):666-70. doi: 10.1038/nature08689. Epub 2009 Dec 6.

Large, rare chromosomal deletions associated with severe early-onset obesity.

Bochukova EG(1), Huang N, Keogh J, Henning E, Purmann C, Blaszczyk K, Saeed S,
Hamilton-Shield J, Clayton-Smith J, O'Rahilly S, Hurles ME, Farooqi IS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of
Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2010 Dec;78(6):521-3.

Obesity is a highly heritable and genetically heterogeneous disorder. Here we
investigated the contribution of copy number variation to obesity in 300
Caucasian patients with severe early-onset obesity, 143 of whom also had
developmental delay. Large (>500 kilobases), rare (<1%) deletions were
significantly enriched in patients compared to 7,366 controls (P < 0.001). We
identified several rare copy number variants that were recurrent in patients but 
absent or at much lower prevalence in controls. We identified five patients with 
overlapping deletions on chromosome 16p11.2 that were found in 2 out of 7,366
controls (P < 5 x 10(-5)). In three patients the deletion co-segregated with
severe obesity. Two patients harboured a larger de novo 16p11.2 deletion,
extending through a 593-kilobase region previously associated with autism and
mental retardation; both of these patients had mild developmental delay in
addition to severe obesity. In an independent sample of 1,062 patients with
severe obesity alone, the smaller 16p11.2 deletion was found in an additional two
patients. All 16p11.2 deletions encompass several genes but include SH2B1, which 
is known to be involved in leptin and insulin signalling. Deletion carriers
exhibited hyperphagia and severe insulin resistance disproportionate for the
degree of obesity. We show that copy number variation contributes significantly
to the genetic architecture of human obesity.

PMCID: PMC3108883
PMID: 19966786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010 Mar;19(3):169-78. doi:
10.1007/s00787-009-0076-x. Epub 2009 Nov 26.

Genetics of autistic disorders: review and clinical implications.

Freitag CM(1), Staal W, Klauck SM, Duketis E, Waltes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics, and
Psychotherapy, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, Deutschordenstrasse 50,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. C.Freitag@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Twin and family studies in autistic disorders (AD) have elucidated a high
heritability of AD. In this literature review, we will present an overview on
molecular genetic studies in AD and highlight the most recent findings of an
increased rate of copy number variations in AD. An extensive literature search in
the PubMed database was performed to obtain English published articles on genetic
findings in autism. Results of linkage, (genome wide) association and cytogenetic
studies are presented, and putative aetiopathological pathways are discussed.
Implications of the different genetic findings for genetic counselling and
genetic testing at present will be described. The article ends with a prospectus 
on future directions.

PMCID: PMC2839494
PMID: 19941018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 May;18(5):588-95. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.206. Epub 2009 Nov
25.

Systematic genotype-phenotype analysis of autism susceptibility loci implicates
additional symptoms to co-occur with autism.

Buizer-Voskamp JE(1), Franke L, Staal WG, van Daalen E, Kemner C, Ophoff RA,
Vorstman JA, van Engeland H, Wijmenga C.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neurosciences, Department of Psychiatry, University
Medical Centre, Heidelberglaan, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Many genetic studies in autism have been performed, resulting in the
identification of multiple linkage regions and cytogenetic aberrations, but
little unequivocal evidence for the involvement of specific genes exists. By
identifying novel symptoms in these patients, enhanced phenotyping of autistic
individuals not only improves understanding and diagnosis but also helps to
define biologically more homogeneous groups of patients, improving the potential 
to detect causative genes. Supported by recent copy number variation findings in 
autism, we hypothesized that for some susceptibility loci, autism resembles a
contiguous gene syndrome, caused by aberrations within multiple (contiguous)
genes, which jointly increases autism susceptibility. This would result in
various different clinical manifestations that might be rather atypical, but that
also co-occur with autism. To test this hypothesis, 13 susceptibility loci,
identified through genetic linkage and cytogenetic analyses, were systematically 
analyzed. The Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database was used to identify
syndromes caused by mutations in the genes residing in each of these loci.
Subsequent analysis of the symptoms expressed within these disorders allowed us
to identify 33 symptoms (significantly more than expected, P=0.037) that were
over-represented in previous reports mapping to these loci. Some of these
symptoms, including seizures and craniofacial abnormalities, support our
hypothesis as they are already known to co-occur with autism. These symptoms,
together with ones that have not previously been described to co-occur with
autism, might be considered for use as inclusion or exclusion criteria toward
defining etiologically more homogeneous groups for molecular genetic studies of
autism.

PMCID: PMC2987310
PMID: 19935830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr;18(4):429-35. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.192. Epub 2009 Nov
18.

Identification of ANKRD11 and ZNF778 as candidate genes for autism and variable
cognitive impairment in the novel 16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome.

Willemsen MH(1), Fernandez BA, Bacino CA, Gerkes E, de Brouwer AP, Pfundt R,
Sikkema-Raddatz B, Scherer SW, Marshall CR, Potocki L, van Bokhoven H, Kleefstra 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, PO
Box 9101, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands. m.willemsen@antrg.umcn.nl

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2):131-3.

The clinical use of array comparative genomic hybridization in the evaluation of 
patients with multiple congenital anomalies and/or mental retardation has
recently led to the discovery of a number of novel microdeletion and
microduplication syndromes. We present four male patients with overlapping
molecularly defined de novo microdeletions of 16q24.3. The clinical features
observed in these patients include facial dysmorphisms comprising prominent
forehead, large ears, smooth philtrum, pointed chin and wide mouth, variable
cognitive impairment, autism spectrum disorder, structural anomalies of the
brain, seizures and neonatal thrombocytopenia. Although deletions vary in size,
the common region of overlap is only 90 kb and comprises two known genes, Ankyrin
Repeat Domain 11 (ANKRD11) (MIM 611192) and Zinc Finger 778 (ZNF778), and is
located approximately 10 kb distally to Cadherin 15 (CDH15) (MIM 114019). This
region is not found as a copy number variation in controls. We propose that these
patients represent a novel and distinctive microdeletion syndrome, characterized 
by autism spectrum disorder, variable cognitive impairment, facial dysmorphisms
and brain abnormalities. We suggest that haploinsufficiency of ANKRD11 and/or
ZNF778 contribute to this phenotype and speculate that further investigation of
non-deletion patients who have features suggestive of this 16q24.3 microdeletion 
syndrome might uncover other mutations in one or both of these genes.

PMCID: PMC2987261
PMID: 19920853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Trends Genet. 2009 Dec;25(12):536-44. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2009.10.006. Epub 2009
Nov 10.

Copy-number variants in neurodevelopmental disorders: promises and challenges.

Merikangas AK(1), Corvin AP, Gallagher L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, St. James
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. merikana@tcd.ie

Copy-number variation (CNV) is the most prevalent type of structural variation in
the human genome. There is emerging evidence that copy-number variants (CNVs)
provide a new vista on understanding susceptibility to neuropsychiatric
disorders. Some challenges in the interpretation of current CNV studies include
the use of overlapping samples, differing phenotypic definitions, an absence of
population norms for CNVs and a lack of consensus in methods for CNV detection
and analysis. Here, we review current CNV association study methods and results
in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia, and provide suggestions for
design approaches to future studies that might maximize the translation of this
work to etiological understanding.

PMID: 19910074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2010:371-82.

COKGEN: a software for the identification of rare copy number variation from SNP 
microarrays.

Yavas G(1), Koyuturk M, Ozsoyoglu M, Gould MP, Laframboise T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Until fairly recently, it was believed that essentially all human cells harbor
two copies of each locus in the autosomal genome. However, studies have now shown
that there are segments of the genome that are polymorphic with regard to genomic
copy number. These copy number variations (CNVs) have a role in various diseases 
such as Alzheimer disease, Crohn's disease, autism and schizophrenia. In the
effort to scan the entire genome for these gains and losses of DNA, single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have emerged as an important tool. As such, 
CNV identification from SNP array data is attracting considerable attention as an
algorithmic problem, and many methods have been published over the last few
years. However, many of the existing model-based methods train their models based
on common variations and are therefore less successful in the identification of
rare CNVs, detection of which may be very important in personalized genomics
applications. In this paper, we formulate CNV identification explicitly as an
optimization problem with an objective function that is characterized by several 
adjustable parameters. These parameters can be configured based on the
characteristics of the experimental platform and target application, so that the 
solution to the optimization problem is the most accurate set of CNV calls. Our
method, termed COKGEN, efficiently solves this problem using a variant of the
well-known heuristic simulated annealing. We apply COKGEN to data from hundreds
of samples, and demonstrate its ability to detect known CNVs at a high level of
sensitivity without sacrificing specificity, not only for common but also rare
CNVs. Furthermore, we show that it performs better than other publicly-available 
methods. The configurability of COKGEN, its computational efficiency, and its
accuracy in calling rare CNVs make it particularly useful for personalized
genomics applications. COKGEN is implemented as an R package and is freely
available at http://mendel.gene.cwru.edu/laframboiselab/software.php.

PMID: 19908389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2009 Nov;9(8):795-803. doi: 10.1586/erm.09.59.

Autism genetics: emerging data from genome-wide copy-number and single nucleotide
polymorphism scans.

Weiss LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Institute for Human Genetics, Center for
Neurobiology and Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory, Box F-0984, San Francisco, 
CA 94143-0984, USA. lauren.weiss@ucsf.edu

Autism and related traits are highly heritable but cannot be explained by
currently known genetic risk factors. Therefore, the advent of genome-wide single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number variant (CNV) microarray
technologies heralded identification of additional autism loci. CNVs associated
with autism seem to show variable expressivity, also leading to other phenotypes,
such as schizophrenia, mental retardation/developmental delay and epilepsy.
Initial genome-wide SNP-association studies have each identified a single novel
associated locus with modest effect. Based on the lessons from other complex
common disease, larger sample sizes and meta-analyses are likely to identify
additional SNP loci, and the genes implicated may act on multiple related
disorders. Even if common alleles or rare variants hold little predictive value, 
neurodevelopmental pathways disrupted in autism may be identified. Future
research might yet uncover common CNV risk loci and rare single nucleotide risk
alleles, which are currently difficult to detect. The genetic architecture and
phenotypic heterogeneity identified so far suggest additional approaches, such as
population-based research and study of relevant neurobiological endophenotypes.

PMID: 19895225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Trends Genet. 2009 Dec;25(12):528-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2009.10.004. Epub 2009
Oct 31.

Rare structural variants in schizophrenia: one disorder, multiple mutations; one 
mutation, multiple disorders.

Sebat J(1), Levy DL, McCarthy SE.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.
sebat@cshl.edu

Recent studies have established an important role for rare genomic deletions and 
duplications in the etiology of schizophrenia. This research suggests that the
genetic architecture of neuropsychiatric disorders includes a constellation of
rare mutations in many different genes. Mutations that confer substantial risk
for schizophrenia have been identified at several loci, most of which have also
been implicated in other neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism. Genetic 
heterogeneity is a characteristic of schizophrenia; conversely, phenotypic
heterogeneity is a characteristic of all schizophrenia-associated mutations. Both
kinds of heterogeneity probably reflect the complexity of neurodevelopment.
Research strategies must account for both genetic and clinical heterogeneity to
identify the genes and pathways crucial for the development of neuropsychiatric
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3351381
PMID: 19883952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Feb 1;67(3):283-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.08.034.
Epub 2009 Oct 31.

Copy number variation in schizophrenia in the Japanese population.

Ikeda M(1), Aleksic B, Kirov G, Kinoshita Y, Yamanouchi Y, Kitajima T, Kawashima 
K, Okochi T, Kishi T, Zaharieva I, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Ozaki N, Iwata N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and
Genomics, Department of Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine,
Cardiff University, Cardiff CF14 4XN, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Copy number variants (CNVs) have been shown to increase the risk to
develop schizophrenia. The best supported findings are at 1q21.1, 15q11.2,
15q13.3, and 22q11.2 and deletions at the gene neurexin 1 (NRXN1).
METHODS: In this study, we used Affymetrix 5.0 arrays to investigate the role of 
rare CNVs in 575 patients with schizophrenia and 564 control subjects from Japan.
RESULTS: There was a nonsignificant trend for excess of rare CNVs in
schizophrenia (p = .087); however, we did not confirm the previously implicated
association for very large CNVs (>500 kilobase [kb]) in this population. We
provide support for three previous findings in schizophrenia, as we identified
one deletion in a case at 1q21.1, one deletion within NRXN1, and four
duplications in cases and one in a control subject at 16p13.1, a locus first
implicated in autism and later in schizophrenia.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population, we support some of the previous findings in
schizophrenia but could not find an increased burden of very large (>500 kb)
CNVs, which was proposed recently. However, we provide support for the role of
CNVs at 16p13.1, 1q21.1, and NRXN1.

Copyright 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 19880096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Autism Res. 2009 Oct;2(5):258-66. doi: 10.1002/aur.96.

Identification of chromosome 7 inversion breakpoints in an autistic family
narrows candidate region for autism susceptibility.

Cukier HN(1), Skaar DA, Rayner-Evans MY, Konidari I, Whitehead PL, Jaworski JM,
Cuccaro ML, Pericak-Vance MA, Gilbert JR.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miami,
Florida, USA.

Chromosomal breaks and rearrangements have been observed in conjunction with
autism and autistic spectrum disorders. A chromosomal inversion has been
previously reported in autistic siblings, spanning the region from approximately 
7q22.1 to 7q31. This family is distinguished by having multiple individuals with 
autism and associated disabilities. The region containing the inversion has been 
strongly implicated in autism by multiple linkage studies, and has been
particularly associated with language defects in autism as well as in other
disorders with language components. Mapping of the inversion breakpoints by FISH 
has localized the inversion to the region spanning approximately 99-108.75 Mb of 
chromosome 7. The proximal breakpoint has the potential to disrupt either the
coding sequence or regulatory regions of a number of cytochrome P450 genes while 
the distal region falls in a relative gene desert. Copy number variant analysis
of the breakpoint regions detected no duplication or deletion that could clearly 
be associated with disease status. Association analysis in our autism data set
using single nucleotide polymorphisms located near the breakpoints showed no
significant association with proximal breakpoint markers, but has identified
markers near the distal breakpoint ( approximately 108-110 Mb) with significant
associations to autism. The chromosomal abnormality in this family strengthens
the case for an autism susceptibility gene in the chromosome 7q22-31 region and
targets a candidate region for further investigation.

PMID: 19877165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Psychol Med. 2010 Apr;40(4):529-40. doi: 10.1017/S0033291709991139. Epub 2009 Oct
12.

What have the genomics ever done for the psychoses?

Gill M(1), Donohoe G, Corvin A.

Author information: 
(1)Neuropsychiatric Genetics Research Group, Department of Psychiatry, School of 
Medicine, Trinity College Dublin 8, Ireland. mgill@tcd.ie

Comment in
    Psychol Med. 2011 Jan;41(1):219-20; author reply 220.

BACKGROUND: Despite the substantial heritability of the psychoses and their
genuine public health burden, the applicability of the genomic approach in
psychiatry has been strongly questioned or prematurely dismissed.
METHODS: selective review of the recent literature on molecular genetic and
genomic approaches to the psychoses including the early output from genome-wide
association studies and the genomic analysis of DNA structural variation.
RESULTS: Susceptibility variants at strong candidate genes have been identified
including neuregulin, dysbindin, DISC1 and neurexin 1. Rare but highly penetrant 
copy number variants and new mutations affecting genes involved in
neurodevelopment, cell signalling and synaptic function have been described
showing some overlapping genetic architecture with other developmental disorders 
including autism. The de-novo mutations described offer an explanation for the
familial sporadic divide and the persistence of schizophrenia in the population. 
The functional effects of risk variants at the level of cognition and
connectivity has been described and recently, ZNF804A has been identified, and
the MHC re-identified as risk loci, and it has been shown that at least a third
of the variation in liability is due to multiple common risk variants of small
effect with a substantial shared genetic liability between schizophrenia and
bipolar affective disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: The genomics have done much for the psychoses to date and more is
anticipated.

PMID: 19818200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Clin Genet. 2009 Oct;76(4):348-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01254.x.

Copy number changes of the microcephalin 1 gene (MCPH1) in patients with autism
spectrum disorders.

Ozgen HM(1), van Daalen E, Bolton PF, Maloney VK, Huang S, Cresswell L, van den
Boogaard MJ, Eleveld MJ, van 't Slot R, Hochstenbach R, Beemer FA, Barrow M,
Barber JC, Poot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University Medical Centre,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. h.m.ozgen@umcutrecht.nl

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) represents a set of neurodevelopmental disorders
with a strong genetic aetiology. Chromosomal rearrangements have been detected in
5-10% of the patients with ASD, and recent applications of array comparative
genomic hybridisation (aCGH) are identifying further candidate regions and genes.
In this study, we present four patients who implicate microcephalin 1 (MCPH1) in 
band 8p23.1 as an ASD susceptibility gene. Patient 1 was a girl with a syndromic 
form of autistic disorder satisfying the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised
(ADI-R), Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) and Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) criteria. Oligonucleotide aCGH
(oaCGH) showed that she had a classic inv dup del(8)(qter-> p23.1::p23.1-> p21.2)
containing at least three candidate genes; MCPH1 and DLGAP2 within the 6.9-Mb
terminal deletion and NEF3 within the concomitant 14.1-Mb duplication. Three
further patients with MCPH1 copy number changes were found using
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis in a cohort of 54 families
with ASD patients. Our results show that ASD can be a component of the classical 
inv dup del(8) phenotype and identify changes in copy number of MCPH1 as a
susceptibility factor for ASD in the distal short arm of chromosome 8.

PMID: 19793310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Psychiatry. 2011 Jan;16(1):17-25. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.101. Epub 2009 Sep 29.

Copy number variations of chromosome 16p13.1 region associated with
schizophrenia.

Ingason A(1), Rujescu D, Cichon S, Sigurdsson E, Sigmundsson T, Pietilainen OP,
Buizer-Voskamp JE, Strengman E, Francks C, Muglia P, Gylfason A, Gustafsson O,
Olason PI, Steinberg S, Hansen T, Jakobsen KD, Rasmussen HB, Giegling I, Moller
HJ, Hartmann A, Crombie C, Fraser G, Walker N, Lonnqvist J, Suvisaari J,
Tuulio-Henriksson A, Bramon E, Kiemeney LA, Franke B, Murray R, Vassos E,
Toulopoulou T, Muhleisen TW, Tosato S, Ruggeri M, Djurovic S, Andreassen OA,
Zhang Z, Werge T, Ophoff RA; GROUP Investigators, Rietschel M, Nothen MM,
Petursson H, Stefansson H, Peltonen L, Collier D, Stefansson K, St Clair DM.

Collaborators: Kahn RS, Cahn W, Linszen D, de Haan L, van Os J, Krabbendam L,
Myin-Germeys I, Wiersma D, Bruggeman R.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Deletions and reciprocal duplications of the chromosome 16p13.1 region have
recently been reported in several cases of autism and mental retardation (MR). As
genomic copy number variants found in these two disorders may also associate with
schizophrenia, we examined 4345 schizophrenia patients and 35,079 controls from 8
European populations for duplications and deletions at the 16p13.1 locus, using
microarray data. We found a threefold excess of duplications and deletions in
schizophrenia cases compared with controls, with duplications present in 0.30% of
cases versus 0.09% of controls (P=0.007) and deletions in 0.12 % of cases and
0.04% of controls (P>0.05). The region can be divided into three intervals
defined by flanking low copy repeats. Duplications spanning intervals I and II
showed the most significant (P = 0.00010) association with schizophrenia. The age
of onset in duplication and deletion carriers among cases ranged from 12 to 35
years, and the majority were males with a family history of psychiatric
disorders. In a single Icelandic family, a duplication spanning intervals I and
II was present in two cases of schizophrenia, and individual cases of alcoholism,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and dyslexia. Candidate genes in the
region include NTAN1 and NDE1. We conclude that duplications and perhaps also
deletions of chromosome 16p13.1, previously reported to be associated with autism
and MR, also confer risk of schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3330746
PMID: 19786961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Med Genet. 2010 Mar;47(3):195-203. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.069369. Epub 2009 Sep 
15.

Phenotypic spectrum associated with de novo and inherited deletions and
duplications at 16p11.2 in individuals ascertained for diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder.

Fernandez BA(1), Roberts W, Chung B, Weksberg R, Meyn S, Szatmari P,
Joseph-George AM, Mackay S, Whitten K, Noble B, Vardy C, Crosbie V, Luscombe S,
Tucker E, Turner L, Marshall CR, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Provincial Medical Genetics Program, Health Sciences Center, 300 Prince Philip
Drive, St. John's Newfoundland, A1B 3V6, Canada. bfernandez@nl.rogers.com

BACKGROUND: Recurrent microdeletions and microduplications of approximately 555
kb at 16p11.2 confer susceptibility to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in up to 1%
of ASD patients. No physical or behavioural features have been identified that
distinguish these individuals as having a distinct ASD subtype, but clinical data
are limited.
METHODS: We report five autistic probands identified by microarray analysis with 
copy number variation (CNV) of 16p11.2 (three deletions, two duplications). Each 
patient was assessed for ASD and dysmorphic features. We also describe a deletion
positive 26-month-old female who has developmental delay (DD) and autistic
features.
RESULTS: Proband 1 (female with ASD, de novo deletion) is not dysmorphic. Proband
2 (male with autism, de novo deletion) and proband 3 and his brother (males with 
autism, inherited deletions) are dysmorphic, but the two probands do not resemble
one another. The mother of proband 3 has mild mental retardation (MR), minor
dysmorphism and meets the criteria for ASD. Proband 4 (dysmorphic autistic male, 
de novo duplication) had a congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Proband 5
(non-dysmorphic ASD female with a duplication) has two apparently healthy
duplication positive relatives. Probands 1 and 2 have deletion negative siblings 
with ASD and Asperger syndrome, respectively. Proband 6 (a female with DD and an 
inherited duplication) is dysmorphic, but has oligohydramnios sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotypic spectrum associated with CNV at 16p11.2 includes ASD,
MR/DD and/or possibly other primary psychiatric disorders. Compared with the
microduplications, the reciprocal microdeletions are more likely to be penetrant 
and to be associated with non-specific major or minor dysmorphism. There are
deletion positive ASD probands with a less severe phenotype than deletion
negative ASD siblings underscoring the significant phenotypic heterogeneity.

PMID: 19755429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Arch Neurol. 2009 Sep;66(9):1158-9. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.197.

Disparate diseases due to copycat copy number variations.

Powell CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390-9070, USA.
craig.powell@utsouthwestern.edu

PMCID: PMC3903580
PMID: 19752307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Med Genet. 2010 Apr;47(4):223-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.068072. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

Array comparative genomic hybridisation of 52 subjects with a Smith-Magenis-like 
phenotype: identification of dosage sensitive loci also associated with
schizophrenia, autism, and developmental delay.

Williams SR(1), Girirajan S, Tegay D, Nowak N, Hatchwell E, Elsea SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, USA.

BACKGROUND: Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is caused by del(17)(p11.2), including
the retinoic acid induced 1 gene (RAI1), or mutation of RAI1. Haploinsufficiency 
of RAI1 results in developmental delay, mental retardation, sleep disturbance,
self-abusive behaviors, and most features commonly seen in SMS. In this study, 52
subjects were referred for molecular analysis of RAI1 due to the presence of an
SMS-like phenotype in each case. For this cohort, deletion and mutation analyses 
of RAI1 were negative; thus, the clinical diagnosis of SMS could not be confirmed
and suggested that at least one other locus was responsible for the phenotype(s) 
observed.
METHODS: Here, we present whole-genome array comparative genomic hybridization
and detailed phenotypic data of these 52 subjects.
RESULTS: This SMS-like cohort exhibited developmental delays, sleep disturbance, 
self-abusive behaviors, motor dysfunction, and hyperactivity of the same type and
prevalence as that of SMS. In this analysis, we identified at least 5 new loci
that likely contribute to the SMS-like phenotype, including CNVs that were found 
in more than one subject. Genes in these regions function in development,
neurological integrity, and morphology, all of which are affected in SMS.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the phenotypic overlap between SMS and the SMS-like cases,
these data may provide some insight into the function of RAI1, including the
pathways in which it may be involved and the genes it may regulate. These data
will improve diagnosis, understanding, and potentially treatment of these complex
behavior and mental retardation syndromes.

PMID: 19752160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Psychiatr Genet. 2009 Oct;19(5):219-36. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32832cec32.

Selected summaries from the XVI World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, Osaka,
Japan, 11-15 October 2008.

Bergen S(1), Chen J, Dagdan E, Foon TS, Goes FS, Houlihan LM, Kloiber S, Kumar
RA, Kuzman MR, Menke A, Pedroso I, Videtic A, Villafuerte S, DeLisi LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia, USA.

The XVI World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, sponsored by the International
Society of Psychiatric Genetics took place in Osaka, Japan, October 2008.
Approximately 600 participants gathered to discuss the latest molecular genetic
findings relevant to serious mental illnesses, including schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder, major depression, alcohol and drug abuse, autism, and attention-deficit
disorder. Recently, the field has advanced considerably and includes new
genome-wide association studies with the largest numbers of individuals screened 
and density of markers to date, as well as newly uncovered genetic phenomena,
such as copy number variation that may prove to be relevant for specific brain
disorders. The following report represents some of the areas covered during this 
conference and some of the major new findings presented.

PMID: 19661838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Med Genet. 2009 Oct;46(10):680-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.066795. Epub 2009 Jul
21.

Phenomic determinants of genomic variation in autism spectrum disorders.

Qiao Y(1), Riendeau N, Koochek M, Liu X, Harvard C, Hildebrand MJ, Holden JJ,
Rajcan-Separovic E, Lewis ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, The University of British Columbia, and BC
Child and Family Research Institute, C234-4500 Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, V6H
3N1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are common, heritable neurobiologic 
conditions of unknown aetiology confounded by significant clinical and genetic
heterogeneity.
METHODS: This study evaluated a broad categorisation of phenotypic traits (or
phenome) for 100 subjects with Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised/Autism
Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Generic (ADI-R/ADOS-G) confirmed idiopathic ASD
undergoing 1 Mb bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array comparative genomic
hybridisation (CGH).
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Array CGH uncovered nine different pathogenic copy
number variants (pCNVs) in 9/100 ASD subjects having complex phenotypes (ASD+/-
intellectual disability (ID; IQ<70)) and/or physical anomalies), normal
karyotype, fragile X analysis, and comprehensive evaluation by a clinical
geneticist. Unique pCNVs in our cohort included del(5)(p15.2p15.31) (2.4 Mb),
del(3)(p24.3) (0.1 Mb) and dup(18)(p11.3)(0.9 Mb). Five pCNVs were recurrent in
our cohort or were previously described in subjects with ASD+/-ID:
(dup(7)(q11.23)(1.5 Mb); del(2)(p15p16.1) (6.1 Mb and 7.9 Mb); del(14)(q11.2)
(0.7 Mb) and dup(15)(q11q13) (10 Mb), including del(X)(p11.22) (470 Kb) in two
autistic brothers. Male: female distribution in subjects with pCNVs was reduced
to 1.25:1 from 3.2:1 in the original cohort. The authors stratified the study
population according to a broad spectrum of clinical features and correlated
specific phenotypes with respect to CNV load and pathogenicity. The findings
indicate increased prevalence of pCNVs in subjects with microcephaly (<2nd
centile; n = 2 of 4 ASD subjects with microcephaly; p = 0.04), and ID (n = 9 of
64 subjects with ASD and ID; p = 0.02). Interestingly, in the absence of ID
co-morbidity with an ASD, no pCNVs were found. The relationship between parental 
ages at delivery and CNV load and pathogenicity was also explored.

PMID: 19625284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Jun 30;10:61. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-61.

Association study of SHANK3 gene polymorphisms with autism in Chinese Han
population.

Qin J(1), Jia M, Wang L, Lu T, Ruan Y, Liu J, Guo Y, Zhang J, Yang X, Yue W,
Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mental Health, Peking University, Beijing, PR China.
jianqin@bjmu.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Autism, a heterogeneous disease, is described as a genetic psychiatry
disorder. Recently, abnormalities at the synapse are supposed to be important for
the etiology of autism.SHANK3 (SH3 and multiple ankyrin repeat domains protein)
gene encodes a master synaptic scaffolding protein at postsynaptic density (PSD) 
of excitatory synapse. Rare mutations and copy number variation (CNV) evidence
suggested SHANK3 as a strong candidate gene for the pathogenesis of autism.
METHODS: We performed an association study between SHANK3 gene polymorphisms and 
autism in Chinese Han population. We analyzed the association between five single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the SHANK3 gene and autism in 305 Chinese Han 
trios, using the family based association test (FBAT). Linkage disequilibrium
(LD) analysis showed the presence of LD between pairwise markers across the
locus. We also performed mutation screening for the rare de novo mutations
reported previously.
RESULTS: No significant evidence between any SNPs of SHANK3 and autism was
observed. We did not detect any mutations described previously in our cohort.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that SHANK3 might not represent a major susceptibility
gene for autism in Chinese Han population.

PMCID: PMC2721832
PMID: 19566951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000536. Epub 2009 
Jun 26.

Genome-wide analyses of exonic copy number variants in a family-based study point
to novel autism susceptibility genes.

Bucan M(1), Abrahams BS, Wang K, Glessner JT, Herman EI, Sonnenblick LI, Alvarez 
Retuerto AI, Imielinski M, Hadley D, Bradfield JP, Kim C, Gidaya NB, Lindquist I,
Hutman T, Sigman M, Kustanovich V, Lajonchere CM, Singleton A, Kim J, Wassink TH,
McMahon WM, Owley T, Sweeney JA, Coon H, Nurnberger JI, Li M, Cantor RM, Minshew 
NJ, Sutcliffe JS, Cook EH, Dawson G, Buxbaum JD, Grant SF, Schellenberg GD,
Geschwind DH, Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Autism Genetic Resource Exchange, Autism Speaks, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America.

The genetics underlying the autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) is complex and
remains poorly understood. Previous work has demonstrated an important role for
structural variation in a subset of cases, but has lacked the resolution
necessary to move beyond detection of large regions of potential interest to
identification of individual genes. To pinpoint genes likely to contribute to ASD
etiology, we performed high density genotyping in 912 multiplex families from the
Autism Genetics Resource Exchange (AGRE) collection and contrasted results to
those obtained for 1,488 healthy controls. Through prioritization of exonic
deletions (eDels), exonic duplications (eDups), and whole gene duplication events
(gDups), we identified more than 150 loci harboring rare variants in multiple
unrelated probands, but no controls. Importantly, 27 of these were confirmed on
examination of an independent replication cohort comprised of 859 cases and an
additional 1,051 controls. Rare variants at known loci, including exonic
deletions at NRXN1 and whole gene duplications encompassing UBE3A and several
other genes in the 15q11-q13 region, were observed in the course of these
analyses. Strong support was likewise observed for previously unreported genes
such as BZRAP1, an adaptor molecule known to regulate synaptic transmission, with
eDels or eDups observed in twelve unrelated cases but no controls (p =
2.3x10(-5)). Less is known about MDGA2, likewise observed to be case-specific (p 
= 1.3x10(-4)). But, it is notable that the encoded protein shows an unexpectedly 
high similarity to Contactin 4 (BLAST E-value = 3x10(-39)), which has also been
linked to disease. That hundreds of distinct rare variants were each seen only
once further highlights complexity in the ASDs and points to the continued need
for larger cohorts.

PMCID: PMC2695001
PMID: 19557195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;15(6):637-46. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.57. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Rare structural variants found in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder are
preferentially associated with neurodevelopmental genes.

Elia J(1), Gai X, Xie HM, Perin JC, Geiger E, Glessner JT, D'arcy M, deBerardinis
R, Frackelton E, Kim C, Lantieri F, Muganga BM, Wang L, Takeda T, Rappaport EF,
Grant SF, Berrettini W, Devoto M, Shaikh TH, Hakonarson H, White PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;15(11):1122.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common and highly heritable 
disorder, but specific genetic factors underlying risk remain elusive. To assess 
the role of structural variation in ADHD, we identified 222 inherited copy number
variations (CNVs) within 335 ADHD patients and their parents that were not
detected in 2026 unrelated healthy individuals. Although no excess CNVs, either
deletions or duplications, were found in the ADHD cohort relative to controls,
the inherited rare CNV-associated gene set was significantly enriched for genes
reported as candidates in studies of autism, schizophrenia and Tourette syndrome,
including A2BP1, AUTS2, CNTNAP2 and IMMP2L. The ADHD CNV gene set was also
significantly enriched for genes known to be important for psychological and
neurological functions, including learning, behavior, synaptic transmission and
central nervous system development. Four independent deletions were located
within the protein tyrosine phosphatase gene, PTPRD, recently implicated as a
candidate gene for restless legs syndrome, which frequently presents with ADHD. A
deletion within the glutamate receptor gene, GRM5, was found in an affected
parent and all three affected offspring whose ADHD phenotypes closely resembled
those of the GRM5 null mouse. Together, these results suggest that rare inherited
structural variations play an important role in ADHD development and indicate a
set of putative candidate genes for further study in the etiology of ADHD.

PMCID: PMC2877197
PMID: 19546859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genome Res. 2009 Sep;19(9):1579-85. doi: 10.1101/gr.094987.109. Epub 2009 Jun 8.

A method for rapid, targeted CNV genotyping identifies rare variants associated
with neurocognitive disease.

Mefford HC(1), Cooper GM, Zerr T, Smith JD, Baker C, Shafer N, Thorland EC,
Skinner C, Schwartz CE, Nickerson DA, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA.

Copy-number variants (CNVs) are substantial contributors to human disease. A
central challenge in CNV-disease association studies is to characterize the
pathogenicity of rare and possibly incompletely penetrant events, which requires 
the accurate detection of rare CNVs in large numbers of individuals. Cost and
throughput issues limit our ability to perform these studies. We have adapted the
Illumina BeadXpress SNP genotyping assay and developed an algorithm,
SNP-Conditional OUTlier detection (SCOUT), to rapidly and accurately detect both 
rare and common CNVs in large cohorts. This approach is customizable, cost
effective, highly parallelized, and largely automated. We applied this method to 
screen 69 loci in 1105 children with unexplained intellectual disability,
identifying pathogenic variants in 3.1% of these individuals and potentially
pathogenic variants in an additional 2.3%. We identified seven individuals (0.7%)
with a deletion of 16p11.2, which has been previously associated with autism. Our
results widen the phenotypic spectrum of these deletions to include intellectual 
disability without autism. We also detected 1.65-3.4 Mbp duplications at 16p13.11
in 1.1% of affected individuals and 350 kbp deletions at 15q11.2, near the
Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome critical region, in 0.8% of affected individuals. 
Compared to published CNVs in controls they are significantly (P = 4.7 x 10(-5)
and 0.003, respectively) enriched in these children, supporting previously
published hypotheses that they are neurocognitive disease risk factors. More
generally, this approach offers a previously unavailable balance between
customization, cost, and throughput for analysis of CNVs and should prove
valuable for targeted CNV detection in both research and diagnostic settings.

PMCID: PMC2752120
PMID: 19506092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2009 May 28;4(5):e5324. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005324.

Gene-network analysis identifies susceptibility genes related to glycobiology in 
autism.

van der Zwaag B(1), Franke L, Poot M, Hochstenbach R, Spierenburg HA, Vorstman
JA, van Daalen E, de Jonge MV, Verbeek NE, Brilstra EH, van 't Slot R, Ophoff RA,
van Es MA, Blauw HM, Veldink JH, Buizer-Voskamp JE, Beemer FA, van den Berg LH,
Wijmenga C, van Amstel HK, van Engeland H, Burbach JP, Staal WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The recent identification of copy-number variation in the human genome has opened
up new avenues for the discovery of positional candidate genes underlying complex
genetic disorders, especially in the field of psychiatric disease. One major
challenge that remains is pinpointing the susceptibility genes in the multitude
of disease-associated loci. This challenge may be tackled by reconstruction of
functional gene-networks from the genes residing in these loci. We applied this
approach to autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and identified the copy-number
changes in the DNA of 105 ASD patients and 267 healthy individuals with Illumina 
Humanhap300 Beadchips. Subsequently, we used a human reconstructed gene-network, 
Prioritizer, to rank candidate genes in the segmental gains and losses in our
autism cohort. This analysis highlighted several candidate genes already known to
be mutated in cognitive and neuropsychiatric disorders, including RAI1, BRD1, and
LARGE. In addition, the LARGE gene was part of a sub-network of seven genes
functioning in glycobiology, present in seven copy-number changes specifically
identified in autism patients with limited co-morbidity. Three of these seven
copy-number changes were de novo in the patients. In autism patients with a
complex phenotype and healthy controls no such sub-network was identified. An
independent systematic analysis of 13 published autism susceptibility loci
supports the involvement of genes related to glycobiology as we also identified
the same or similar genes from those loci. Our findings suggest that the
occurrence of genomic gains and losses of genes associated with glycobiology are 
important contributors to the development of ASD.

PMCID: PMC2683930
PMID: 19492091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Br Med Bull. 2009;91:61-74. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldp017. Epub 2009 May 14.

Schizophrenia genetics: new insights from new approaches.

Williams HJ(1), Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Schizophrenia is a debilitating psychiatric disorder that imposes a
considerable burden on sufferers, their families and society. The prominent
involvement of genes, combined with the complexity and relative inaccessibility
of the brain has led many to suggest that the identification of specific risk
loci offers the best chance of understanding pathogenesis.
SOURCES OF DATA: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and copy number
variation (CNV) publications have been included in this review along with key
papers from the fields of schizophrenia, functional psychoses and complex disease
mapping.
AREAS OF AGREEMENT: Recent GWAS have now shown that both common alleles of small 
effect and rare alleles of moderate to large effect contribute to the high
heritability of schizophrenia.
AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: It is well known that many schizophrenic patients suffer
symptoms seen in patients with bipolar disease and vice versa. There is now
considerable interest in using aetiologically relevant risk factors, including
genes, to explore the validity of the contemporary system of classification.
GROWING POINTS: Rare CNVs have been shown to play a role in at least some cases
of schizophrenia and it is highly predictable that this figure will rise with the
use of technologies with higher resolution or that are better designed to assay
common CNVs reliably.
AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING RESEARCH: The findings with common alleles thus far
point to overlap in the genetic risk for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder,
while the specific CNVs implicated in schizophrenia also increase susceptibility 
to a range of developmental disorders, including autism, mental retardation,
attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and epilepsy.

PMID: 19443537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nature. 2009 May 28;459(7246):569-73. doi: 10.1038/nature07953. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

Autism genome-wide copy number variation reveals ubiquitin and neuronal genes.

Glessner JT(1), Wang K, Cai G, Korvatska O, Kim CE, Wood S, Zhang H, Estes A,
Brune CW, Bradfield JP, Imielinski M, Frackelton EC, Reichert J, Crawford EL,
Munson J, Sleiman PM, Chiavacci R, Annaiah K, Thomas K, Hou C, Glaberson W, Flory
J, Otieno F, Garris M, Soorya L, Klei L, Piven J, Meyer KJ, Anagnostou E, Sakurai
T, Game RM, Rudd DS, Zurawiecki D, McDougle CJ, Davis LK, Miller J, Posey DJ,
Michaels S, Kolevzon A, Silverman JM, Bernier R, Levy SE, Schultz RT, Dawson G,
Owley T, McMahon WM, Wassink TH, Sweeney JA, Nurnberger JI, Coon H, Sutcliffe JS,
Minshew NJ, Grant SF, Bucan M, Cook EH, Buxbaum JD, Devlin B, Schellenberg GD,
Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are childhood neurodevelopmental disorders with 
complex genetic origins. Previous studies focusing on candidate genes or genomic 
regions have identified several copy number variations (CNVs) that are associated
with an increased risk of ASDs. Here we present the results from a whole-genome
CNV study on a cohort of 859 ASD cases and 1,409 healthy children of European
ancestry who were genotyped with approximately 550,000 single nucleotide
polymorphism markers, in an attempt to comprehensively identify CNVs conferring
susceptibility to ASDs. Positive findings were evaluated in an independent cohort
of 1,336 ASD cases and 1,110 controls of European ancestry. Besides previously
reported ASD candidate genes, such as NRXN1 (ref. 10) and CNTN4 (refs 11, 12),
several new susceptibility genes encoding neuronal cell-adhesion molecules,
including NLGN1 and ASTN2, were enriched with CNVs in ASD cases compared to
controls (P = 9.5 x 10(-3)). Furthermore, CNVs within or surrounding genes
involved in the ubiquitin pathways, including UBE3A, PARK2, RFWD2 and FBXO40,
were affected by CNVs not observed in controls (P = 3.3 x 10(-3)). We also
identified duplications 55 kilobases upstream of complementary DNA AK123120 (P = 
3.6 x 10(-6)). Although these variants may be individually rare, they target
genes involved in neuronal cell-adhesion or ubiquitin degradation, indicating
that these two important gene networks expressed within the central nervous
system may contribute to the genetic susceptibility of ASD.

PMCID: PMC2925224
PMID: 19404257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Sep;15(9):954-68. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.34. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

High-density SNP association study and copy number variation analysis of the
AUTS1 and AUTS5 loci implicate the IMMP2L-DOCK4 gene region in autism
susceptibility.

Maestrini E(1), Pagnamenta AT, Lamb JA, Bacchelli E, Sykes NH, Sousa I, Toma C,
Barnby G, Butler H, Winchester L, Scerri TS, Minopoli F, Reichert J, Cai G,
Buxbaum JD, Korvatska O, Schellenberg GD, Dawson G, de Bildt A, Minderaa RB,
Mulder EJ, Morris AP, Bailey AJ, Monaco AP; IMGSAC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Autism spectrum disorders are a group of highly heritable neurodevelopmental
disorders with a complex genetic etiology. The International Molecular Genetic
Study of Autism Consortium previously identified linkage loci on chromosomes 7
and 2, termed AUTS1 and AUTS5, respectively. In this study, we performed a
high-density association analysis in AUTS1 and AUTS5, testing more than 3000
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in all known genes in each region, as well
as SNPs in non-genic highly conserved sequences. SNP genotype data were also used
to investigate copy number variation within these regions. The study sample
consisted of 127 and 126 families, showing linkage to the AUTS1 and AUTS5
regions, respectively, and 188 gender-matched controls. Further investigation of 
the strongest association results was conducted in an independent European family
sample containing 390 affected individuals. Association and copy number variant
analysis highlighted several genes that warrant further investigation, including 
IMMP2L and DOCK4 on chromosome 7. Evidence for the involvement of DOCK4 in autism
susceptibility was supported by independent replication of association at
rs2217262 and the finding of a deletion segregating in a sib-pair family.

PMCID: PMC2934739
PMID: 19401682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Oct;17(10):1347-53. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.47. Epub 2009
Apr 22.

Copy number variation and association analysis of SHANK3 as a candidate gene for 
autism in the IMGSAC collection.

Sykes NH(1), Toma C, Wilson N, Volpi EV, Sousa I, Pagnamenta AT, Tancredi R,
Battaglia A, Maestrini E, Bailey AJ, Monaco AP; International Molecular Genetic
Study of Autism Consortium (IMGSAC).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

SHANK3 is located on chromosome 22q13.3 and encodes a scaffold protein that is
found in excitatory synapses opposite the pre-synaptic active zone. SHANK3 is a
binding partner of neuroligins, some of whose genes contain mutations in a small 
subset of individuals with autism. In individuals with autism spectrum disorders 
(ASDs), several studies have found SHANK3 to be disrupted by deletions ranging
from hundreds of kilobases to megabases, suggesting that 1% of individuals with
ASDs may have these chromosomal aberrations. To further analyse the involvement
of SHANK3 in ASD, we screened the International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism
Consortium (IMGSAC) multiplex family sample, 330 families, for SNP association
and copy number variants (CNVs) in SHANK3. A collection of 76 IMGSAC Italian
probands from singleton families was also examined by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification for CNVs. No CNVs or SNP associations were
found within the sample set, although sequencing of the gene was not performed.
Our data suggest that SHANK3 deletions may be limited to lower functioning
individuals with autism.

PMCID: PMC2752466
PMID: 19384346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Psychiatr Genet. 2009 Jun;19(3):154-5. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32832a4fe5.

Copy number variation analysis and sequencing of the X-linked mental retardation 
gene TSPAN7/TM4SF2 in patients with autism spectrum disorder.

Noor A, Gianakopoulos PJ, Fernandez B, Marshall CR, Szatmari P, Roberts W,
Scherer SW, Vincent JB.

PMID: 19339915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Mar;1156:1-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04419.x.

Genes, cognition, and communication: insights from neurodevelopmental disorders.

Bishop DV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk

Twin and family studies have demonstrated that most cognitive traits are
moderately to highly heritable. Neurodevelopmental disorders such as dyslexia,
autism, and specific language impairment (SLI) also show strong genetic
influence. Nevertheless, it has proved difficult for researchers to identify
genes that would explain substantial amounts of variance in cognitive traits or
disorders. Although this observation may seem paradoxical, it fits with a
multifactorial model of how complex human traits are influenced by numerous genes
that interact with one another, and with the environment, to produce a specific
phenotype. Such a model can also explain why genetic influences on cognition have
not vanished in the course of human evolution. Recent linkage and association
studies of SLI and dyslexia are reviewed to illustrate these points. The role of 
nonheritable genetic mutations (sporadic copy number variants) in causing autism 
is also discussed. Finally, research on phenotypic correlates of allelic
variation in the genes ASPM and microcephalin is considered; initial interest in 
these as genes for brain size or intelligence has been dampened by a failure to
find phenotypic differences in people with different versions of these genes.
There is a current vogue for investigators to include measures of allelic
variants in studies of cognition and cognitive disorders. It is important to be
aware that the effect sizes associated with these variants are typically small
and hard to detect without extremely large sample sizes.

PMCID: PMC2805335
PMID: 19338500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Schizophr Bull. 2009 May;35(3):482-90. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbp020. Epub 2009 Mar 
27.

Psychosis genetics: modeling the relationship between schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder, and mixed (or "schizoaffective") psychoses.

Craddock N(1), O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)craddockn@cardiff.ac.uk

As a result of improving technologies and greatly increased sample sizes, the
last 2 years has seen unprecedented advances in identification of specific
genetic risk factors for psychiatric phenotypes. Strong genetic associations have
been reported at common polymorphisms within ANK3 and CACNA1C in bipolar disorder
and ZNF804A in schizophrenia and a relatively specific association between common
variation in GABA(A) receptor genes and cases with features of both bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia. Further, the occurrence of rare copy number variants 
(CNVs) has been shown to be increased in schizophrenia compared with controls.
These emerging data provide a powerful resource for exploring the relationship
between psychiatric phenotypes and can, and should, be used to inform
conceptualization, classification, and diagnosis in psychiatry. It is already
clear that, in general, genetic associations are not specific to one of the
traditional diagnostic categories. For example, variation at ZNF804A is
associated with risk of both bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, and some rare
CNVs are associated with risk of autism and epilepsy as well as schizophrenia.
These data are not consistent with a simple dichotomous model of functional
psychosis and indicate the urgent need for moves toward approaches that (a)
better represent the range of phenotypic variation seen in the clinical
population and (b) reflect the underlying biological variation that gives rise to
the phenotypes. We consider the implications for models of psychosis and the
importance of recognizing and studying illness that has prominent affective and
psychotic features. We conclude that if psychiatry is to translate the
opportunities offered by new research methodologies, we must finally abandon a
19th-century dichotomy and move to a classificatory approach that is worthy of
the 21st century.

PMCID: PMC2669589
PMID: 19329560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2009 Apr;11(2):156-61.

The genetics of childhood-onset schizophrenia: when madness strikes the
prepubescent.

Addington AM(1), Rapoport JL.

Author information: 
(1)Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Building 10, Room 3N202, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. addingta@mail.nih.gov

Stratification by age at onset has been useful for genetic studies across all of 
medicine. For the past 20 years, the National Institute of Mental Health has been
systematically recruiting patients with onset of schizophrenia before age 13
years. Examination of familial transmission of known candidate risk genes was
carried out, and a 10% rate of cytogenetic abnormalities was found. Most
recently, high-density, array-based scans for submicroscopic rare copy number
variations (CNVs) have suggested that this kind of genetic variation occurs more 
frequently than expected by chance in childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) and at 
a higher rate than observed in adult-onset disorder. Several CNVs and cytogenetic
abnormalities associated with COS are also seen in autism and mental retardation.
Populations with COS may have more salient genetic influence than adult-onset
cases. The relationship of rare CNVs to prepsychotic development is being studied
further.

PMCID: PMC2763299
PMID: 19302770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Mar-Apr;2(2):143-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000074.

Copy number variation and susceptibility to human disorders (Review).

Shastry BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University, Rochester, MI, USA.
shastry@oakland.edu.

A large number of analyses of a new form of genetic variation, known as copy
number variation (CNV), have been published recently as a new tool for
understanding the genetic basis of complex traits such as diabetes, asthma,
Crohn's disease, autism and bipolar disorder. Through the use of different types 
of genome-wide scanning procedures, CNVs have been shown to be associated with
several complex and common disorders, including nervous system disorders. One of 
the common features of the regions associated with the complex and common
disorders identified thus far is the presence of CNVs and segmental duplications.
Segmental duplications lead to genome instability. Because of their location and 
nature (several contain genes), many CNVs have functional consequences, such as
gene dosage alteration, the disruption of genes and the modulation of the
activities of other genes. Therefore, these genetic variations have an influence 
on phenotypes, the susceptibility of an individual to disease, drug response and 
human genome evolution. These types of variants (gain and loss of DNA) are not
restricted to humans, having also been identified in other organisms. Our current
knowledge regarding CNVs and their heritability is still rudimentary, due to
their location in regions of complex genomic structure and to the technical
limitations of association studies. Future advances in the technology will aid in
the construction of a new CNV map, used to find the genes underlying common
diseases and to understand familial genetic conditions, severe developmental
defects in humans and other organisms, and genome evolution.

PMID: 21475803  [PubMed]


34. Evol Appl. 2009 Feb;2(1):81-100. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-4571.2008.00056.x. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

Genomic sister-disorders of neurodevelopment: an evolutionary approach.

Crespi B(1), Summers K(2), Dorus S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Simon Fraser University Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, East Carolina University Greenville, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath Bath, UK.

Genomic sister-disorders are defined here as diseases mediated by duplications
versus deletions of the same region. Such disorders can provide unique
information concerning the genomic underpinnings of human neurodevelopment
because effects of diametric variation in gene copy number on cognitive and
behavioral phenotypes can be inferred. We describe evidence from the literature
on deletions versus duplications for the regions underlying the best-known human 
neurogenetic sister-disorders, including Williams syndrome, Velocardiofacial
syndrome, and Smith-Magenis syndrome, as well as the X-chromosomal conditions
Klinefelter and Turner syndromes. These data suggest that diametric copy-number
alterations can, like diametric alterations to imprinted genes, generate
contrasting phenotypes associated with autistic-spectrum and psychotic-spectrum
conditions. Genomically based perturbations to the development of the human
social brain are thus apparently mediated to a notable degree by effects of
variation in gene copy number. We also conducted the first analyses of positive
selection for genes in the regions affected by these disorders. We found evidence
consistent with adaptive evolution of protein-coding genes, or selective sweeps, 
for three of the four sets of sister-syndromes analyzed. These studies of
selection facilitate identification of candidate genes for the phenotypes
observed and lend a novel evolutionary dimension to the analysis of human
cognitive architecture and neurogenetic disorders.

PMCID: PMC3352408
PMID: 25567849  [PubMed]


35. Bioinformatics. 2009 Mar 15;25(6):722-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp063. Epub
2009 Jan 28.

A flexible rank-based framework for detecting copy number aberrations from array 
data.

LaFramboise T(1), Winckler W, Thomas RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA. Thomas.LaFramboise@case.edu

MOTIVATION: DNA copy number aberration--both inherited and sporadic--is a
significant contributor to a variety of human diseases. Copy number
characterization is therefore an area of intense research. Probe
hybridization-based arrays are important tools used to measure copy number in a
high-throughput manner.
RESULTS: In this article, we present a simple but powerful nonparametric
rank-based approach to detect deletions and gains from raw array copy number
measurements. We use three different rank-based statistics to detect three
separate molecular phenomena-somatic lesions, germline deletions and germline
gains. The approach is robust and rigorously grounded in statistical theory,
thereby enabling the meaningful assignment of statistical significance to each
putative aberration. We demonstrate the flexibility of our approach by applying
it to data from three different array platforms. We show that our method compares
favorably with established approaches by applying it to published
well-characterized samples. Power simulations demonstrate exquisite sensitivity
for array data of reasonable quality.
CONCLUSIONS: Our flexible rank-based framework is suitable for multiple platforms
including single nucleotide polymorphism arrays and array comparative genomic
hybridization, and can reliably detect gains or losses of genomic DNA, whether
inherited, de novo, or somatic.
AVAILABILITY: An R package RankCopy containing the methods described here, and is
freely available from the author's web site
(http://mendel.gene.cwru.edu/laframboiselab/).
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC2732300
PMID: 19176555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;27(6):654-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2010.06.011.

[Copy number variation analysis of a Chinese Han family with autism spectrum
disorder].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan G(1), Liang Y, Wang Y, Huang W, Zou X, Zhong N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the copy number variation (CNV) in a Chinese Han autistic
spectrum disorder (ASD) pedigree.
METHODS: The pedigree involved six siblings, and three of them were autistic. B
lymphocytes of the pedigree were immortalized with EBV and used as studying
materials. Karyotyping and Affymatrix 500k SNP chip assay were performed to
assess the genetic defects among the members of the pedigree.
RESULTS: Karyotyping indicated that the chromosomes were normal. However, the
15q11 locus was located as de novo CNV region in all autistic siblings of the
pedigree. In this locus, the fragment in 19827281-19998230 illustrated "loss" of 
CNV, while other three fragments with 37 kb, 1316 kb and 37 kb indicated "gain"
of CNV.
CONCLUSION: In this study, olfactory genes OR11K1P, OR4Q1P, OR4H6P, OR4M2, etc.
in the sites with loss and gain of CNV may provide a new clue for genetic
research of autism spectrum disorder.

PMID: 21154326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. JAMA. 2010 Dec 1;304(21):2389-96. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.1706.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in autism.

Giulivi C(1), Zhang YF, Omanska-Klusek A, Ross-Inta C, Wong S, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Tassone F, Pessah IN.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of
Molecular Biosciences, One Shields Avenue, 1120 Haring Hall, Davis, CA 95616,
USA. cgiulivi@ucdavis.edu

CONTEXT: Impaired mitochondrial function may influence processes highly dependent
on energy, such as neurodevelopment, and contribute to autism. No studies have
evaluated mitochondrial dysfunction and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) abnormalities
in a well-defined population of children with autism.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate mitochondrial defects in children with autism.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: Observational study using data collected from
patients aged 2 to 5 years who were a subset of children participating in the
Childhood Autism Risk From Genes and Environment study in California, which is a 
population-based, case-control investigation with confirmed autism cases and
age-matched, genetically unrelated, typically developing controls, that was
launched in 2003 and is still ongoing. Mitochondrial dysfunction and mtDNA
abnormalities were evaluated in lymphocytes from 10 children with autism and 10
controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Oxidative phosphorylation capacity, mtDNA copy number and 
deletions, mitochondrial rate of hydrogen peroxide production, and plasma lactate
and pyruvate.
RESULTS: The reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) oxidase activity
(normalized to citrate synthase activity) in lymphocytic mitochondria from
children with autism was significantly lower compared with controls (mean, 4.4
[95% confidence interval {CI}, 2.8-6.0] vs 12 [95% CI, 8-16], respectively; P =
.001). The majority of children with autism (6 of 10) had complex I activity
below control range values. Higher plasma pyruvate levels were found in children 
with autism compared with controls (0.23 mM [95% CI, 0.15-0.31 mM] vs 0.08 mM
[95% CI, 0.04-0.12 mM], respectively; P = .02). Eight of 10 cases had higher
pyruvate levels but only 2 cases had higher lactate levels compared with
controls. These results were consistent with the lower pyruvate dehydrogenase
activity observed in children with autism compared with controls (1.0 [95% CI,
0.6-1.4] nmol x [min x mg protein](-1) vs 2.3 [95% CI, 1.7-2.9] nmol x [min x mg 
protein](-1), respectively; P = .01). Children with autism had higher
mitochondrial rates of hydrogen peroxide production compared with controls (0.34 
[95% CI, 0.26-0.42] nmol x [min x mg of protein](-1) vs 0.16 [95% CI, 0.12-0.20] 
nmol x [min x mg protein](-1) by complex III; P = .02). Mitochondrial DNA
overreplication was found in 5 cases (mean ratio of mtDNA to nuclear DNA: 239
[95% CI, 217-239] vs 179 [95% CI, 165-193] in controls; P = 10(-4)). Deletions at
the segment of cytochrome b were observed in 2 cases (ratio of cytochrome b to
ND1: 0.80 [95% CI, 0.68-0.92] vs 0.99 [95% CI, 0.93-1.05] for controls; P = .01).
CONCLUSION: In this exploratory study, children with autism were more likely to
have mitochondrial dysfunction, mtDNA overreplication, and mtDNA deletions than
typically developing children.

PMCID: PMC3915058
PMID: 21119085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):618-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.004. Epub
2010 Nov 4.

Deletion 17q12 is a recurrent copy number variant that confers high risk of
autism and schizophrenia.

Moreno-De-Luca D(1); SGENE Consortium, Mulle JG; Simons Simplex Collection
Genetics Consortium, Kaminsky EB, Sanders SJ; GeneSTAR, Myers SM, Adam MP, Pakula
AT, Eisenhauer NJ, Uhas K, Weik L, Guy L, Care ME, Morel CF, Boni C, Salbert BA, 
Chandrareddy A, Demmer LA, Chow EW, Surti U, Aradhya S, Pickering DL, Golden DM, 
Sanger WG, Aston E, Brothman AR, Gliem TJ, Thorland EC, Ackley T, Iyer R, Huang
S, Barber JC, Crolla JA, Warren ST, Martin CL, Ledbetter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. daniel.morenodeluca@emory.edu

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):121.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia are neurodevelopmental
disorders for which recent evidence indicates an important etiologic role for
rare copy number variants (CNVs) and suggests common genetic mechanisms. We
performed cytogenomic array analysis in a discovery sample of patients with
neurodevelopmental disorders referred for clinical testing. We detected a
recurrent 1.4 Mb deletion at 17q12, which harbors HNF1B, the gene responsible for
renal cysts and diabetes syndrome (RCAD), in 18/15,749 patients, including
several with ASD, but 0/4,519 controls. We identified additional shared
phenotypic features among nine patients available for clinical assessment,
including macrocephaly, characteristic facial features, renal anomalies, and
neurocognitive impairments. In a large follow-up sample, the same deletion was
identified in 2/1,182 ASD/neurocognitive impairment and in 4/6,340 schizophrenia 
patients, but in 0/47,929 controls (corrected p = 7.37 x 10-5). These data
demonstrate that deletion 17q12 is a recurrent, pathogenic CNV that confers a
very high risk for ASD and schizophrenia and show that one or more of the 15
genes in the deleted interval is dosage sensitive and essential for normal brain 
development and function. In addition, the phenotypic features of patients with
this CNV are consistent with a contiguous gene syndrome that extends beyond RCAD,
which is caused by HNF1B mutations only.

Copyright (c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2978962
PMID: 21055719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Med Genet. 2011 Jan;48(1):48-54. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.079426. Epub 2010 Oct
23.

Rare familial 16q21 microdeletions under a linkage peak implicate cadherin 8
(CDH8) in susceptibility to autism and learning disability.

Pagnamenta AT(1), Khan H, Walker S, Gerrelli D, Wing K, Bonaglia MC, Giorda R,
Berney T, Mani E, Molteni M, Pinto D, Le Couteur A, Hallmayer J, Sutcliffe JS,
Szatmari P, Paterson AD, Scherer SW, Vieland VJ, Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterised by impairments in
social communication and by a pattern of repetitive behaviours, with learning
disability (LD) typically seen in up to 70% of cases. A recent study using the
PPL statistical framework identified a novel region of genetic linkage on
chromosome 16q21 that is limited to ASD families with LD.
METHODS: In this study, two families with autism and/or LD are described which
harbour rare >1.6 Mb microdeletions located within this linkage region. The
deletion breakpoints are mapped at base-pair resolution and segregation analysis 
is performed using a combination of 1M single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
technology, array comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH), long-range PCR, and
Sanger sequencing. The frequency of similar genomic variants in control subjects 
is determined through analysis of published SNP array data. Expression of CDH8,
the only gene disrupted by these microdeletions, is assessed using reverse
transcriptase PCR and in situ hybridisation analysis of 9 week human embryos.
RESULTS: The deletion of chr16: 60 025 584-61 667 839 was transmitted to three of
three boys with autism and LD and none of four unaffected siblings, from their
unaffected mother. In a second family, an overlapping deletion of chr16:
58 724 527-60 547 472 was transmitted to an individual with severe LD from his
father with moderate LD. No copy number variations (CNVs) disrupting CDH8 were
observed in 5023 controls. Expression analysis indicates that the two CDH8
isoforms are present in the developing human cortex.
CONCLUSION: Rare familial 16q21 microdeletions and expression analysis implicate 
CDH8 in susceptibility to autism and LD.

PMCID: PMC3003876
PMID: 20972252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;49(11):1091-104. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2010.08.009.

Genomic copy number variation in disorders of cognitive development.

Morrow EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brown University and Developmental Disorders Genetics Research Program, Emma
Pendleton Bradley Hospital, Providence, RI, USA. eric_morrow@brown.edu

OBJECTIVE: To highlight recent discoveries in the area of genomic copy number
variation in neuropsychiatric disorders including intellectual disability,
autism, and schizophrenia. To emphasize new principles emerging from this area,
involving the genetic architecture of disease, pathophysiology, and diagnosis.
METHOD: Review of studies published in PubMed including classic studies of
genomic disorders and microarray and copy number studies in normal controls,
intellectual disability, autism, and schizophrenia.
RESULTS: The advent of novel microarray technology has led to a revolution in the
discovery of classic and novel copy number variants (CNVs) in various disorders
affecting cognitive development. Across autism and schizophrenia, global CNV
burden and de novo CNV burden are associated with disease. Also, specific
recurrent CNVs may be associated with several DSM conditions. Each condition is
also associated with heterogeneous and individually rare CNVs.
CONCLUSIONS: CNVs play an important role in the genetic architecture of the
childhood neuropsychiatric disorders discussed. This discovery appears to suggest
an important role for the strict regulation of gene dosage in the
neurodevelopmental roots of these conditions. Microarrays have emerged as
high-yield tests in the diagnosis and molecular subtyping of the childhood-onset 
disorders involving cognitive development. In summary, CNV studies in disorders
of cognitive development have revealed interesting and important new insights and
have opened an avenue of investigation that holds great promise for
neuropsychiatric disease.

Copyright (c) 2010 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3137887
PMID: 20970697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2010 Oct;10(7):837-40. doi: 10.1586/erm.10.82.

Genetic testing for autism: recent advances and clinical implications.

Miller DT.

PMID: 20964600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. F1000 Biol Rep. 2010 Feb 11;2. pii: 11. doi: 10.3410/B2-11.

Distinct disorders affecting the brain share common genetic origins.

Kooy RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1
2610 Antwerp Belgium.

Over the last few years, large cohorts of patients with distinct brain disorders 
of neuropsychiatric and neurological origin have been analyzed for copy number
variation. Surprisingly, the same genetic abnormalities were found in cohorts of 
patients affected with mental retardation, autism, or schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC2948356
PMID: 20948821  [PubMed]


8. Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1401-8. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61109-9. Epub
2010 Sep 29.

Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications in attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder: a genome-wide analysis.

Williams NM(1), Zaharieva I, Martin A, Langley K, Mantripragada K, Fossdal R,
Stefansson H, Stefansson K, Magnusson P, Gudmundsson OO, Gustafsson O, Holmans P,
Owen MJ, O'Donovan M, Thapar A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre in Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics and Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Cardiff, UK. williamsnm@cf.ac.uk

Comment in
    Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1367-8.
    Lancet. 2011 Jan 29;377(9763):377-8; author reply 378.
    Lancet. 2011 Jan 29;377(9763):378-9.
    Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1364.

BACKGROUND: Large, rare chromosomal deletions and duplications known as copy
number variants (CNVs) have been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders
similar to attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We aimed to establish
whether burden of CNVs was increased in ADHD, and to investigate whether
identified CNVs were enriched for loci previously identified in autism and
schizophrenia.
METHODS: We undertook a genome-wide analysis of CNVs in 410 children with ADHD
and 1156 unrelated ethnically matched controls from the 1958 British Birth
Cohort. Children of white UK origin, aged 5-17 years, who met diagnostic criteria
for ADHD or hyperkinetic disorder, but not schizophrenia and autism, were
recruited from community child psychiatry and paediatric outpatient clinics.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in the ADHD and control
groups with two arrays; CNV analysis was limited to SNPs common to both arrays
and included only samples with high-quality data. CNVs in the ADHD group were
validated with comparative genomic hybridisation. We assessed the genome-wide
burden of large (>500 kb), rare (<1% population frequency) CNVs according to the 
average number of CNVs per sample, with significance assessed via permutation.
Locus-specific tests of association were undertaken for test regions defined for 
all identified CNVs and for 20 loci implicated in autism or schizophrenia.
Findings were replicated in 825 Icelandic patients with ADHD and 35,243 Icelandic
controls.
FINDINGS: Data for full analyses were available for 366 children with ADHD and
1047 controls. 57 large, rare CNVs were identified in children with ADHD and 78
in controls, showing a significantly increased rate of CNVs in ADHD (0*156 vs
0*075; p=8*9x10(-5)). This increased rate of CNVs was particularly high in those 
with intellectual disability (0*424; p=2*0x10(-6)), although there was also a
significant excess in cases with no such disability (0*125, p=0*0077). An excess 
of chromosome 16p13.11 duplications was noted in the ADHD group (p=0*0008 after
correction for multiple testing), a finding that was replicated in the Icelandic 
sample (p=0*031). CNVs identified in our ADHD cohort were significantly enriched 
for loci previously reported in both autism (p=0*0095) and schizophrenia
(p=0*010).
INTERPRETATION: Our findings provide genetic evidence of an increased rate of
large CNVs in individuals with ADHD and suggest that ADHD is not purely a social 
construct.
FUNDING: Action Research; Baily Thomas Charitable Trust; Wellcome Trust; UK
Medical Research Council; European Union.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2965350
PMID: 20888040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Brain Res. 2011 Mar 22;1380:85-97. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.046. Epub 2010
Sep 21.

Gene and miRNA expression profiles in autism spectrum disorders.

Ghahramani Seno MM(1), Hu P, Gwadry FG, Pinto D, Marshall CR, Casallo G, Scherer 
SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Accumulating data indicate that there is significant genetic heterogeneity
underlying the etiology in individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD). Some rare and highly-penetrant gene variants and copy number variation
(CNV) regions including NLGN3, NLGN4, NRXN1, SHANK2, SHANK3, PTCHD1, 1q21.1,
maternally-inherited duplication of 15q11-q13, 16p11.2, amongst others, have been
identified to be involved in ASD. Genome-wide association studies have identified
other apparently low risk loci and in some other cases, ASD arises as a co-morbid
phenotype with other medical genetic conditions (e.g. fragile X). The progress
studying the genetics of ASD has largely been accomplished using genomic analyses
of germline-derived DNA. Here, we used gene and miRNA expression profiling using 
cell-line derived total RNA to evaluate possible transcripts and networks of
molecules involved in ASD. Our analysis identified several novel dysregulated
genes and miRNAs in ASD compared with controls, including HEY1, SOX9, miR-486 and
miR-181b. All of these are involved in nervous system development and function
and some others, for example, are involved in NOTCH signaling networks (e.g.
HEY1). Further, we found significant enrichment in molecules associated with
neurological disorders such as Rett syndrome and those associated with nervous
system development and function including long-term potentiation. Our data will
provide a valuable resource for discovery purposes and for comparison to other
gene expression-based, genome-wide DNA studies and other functional data.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20868653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Sep 21;11:134. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-134.

Population-based study of genetic variation in individuals with autism spectrum
disorders from Croatia.

Wang LS(1), Hranilovic D, Wang K, Lindquist IE, Yurcaba L, Petkovic ZB, Gidaya N,
Jernej B, Hakonarson H, Bucan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Laboratory Medicine, Biomedical Graduate Studies,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA. lswang@mail.med.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide studies on autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have mostly
focused on large-scale population samples, but examination of rare variations in 
isolated populations may provide additional insights into the disease
pathogenesis.
METHODS: As a first step in the genetic analysis of ASD in Croatia, we
characterized genetic variation in a sample of 103 subjects with ASD and 203
control individuals, who were genotyped using the Illumina HumanHap550 BeadChip. 
We analyzed the genetic diversity of the Croatian population and its relationship
to other populations, the degree of relatedness via Runs of Homozygosity (ROHs), 
and the distribution of large (>500 Kb) copy number variations.
RESULTS: Combining the Croatian cohort with several previously published
populations in the FastME analysis (an alternative to Neighbor Joining) revealed 
that Croatian subjects cluster, as expected, with Southern Europeans; in
addition, individuals from the same geographic region within Europe cluster
together. Whereas Croatian subjects could be separated from a sample of healthy
control subjects of European origin from North America, Croatian ASD cases and
controls are well mixed. A comparison of runs of homozygosity indicated that the 
number and the median length of regions of homozygosity are higher for ASD
subjects than for controls (p = 6 x 10(-3)). Furthermore, analysis of copy number
variants found a higher frequency of large chromosomal rearrangements (>2 Mb) in 
ASD cases (5/103) than in ethnically matched control subjects (1/197, p = 0.019).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings illustrate the remarkable utility of high-density
genotype data for subjects from a limited geographic area in dissecting genetic
heterogeneity with respect to population and disease related variation.

PMCID: PMC2954843
PMID: 20858243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genome Res. 2010 Nov;20(11):1469-81. doi: 10.1101/gr.107680.110. Epub 2010 Sep
14.

De novo rates and selection of large copy number variation.

Itsara A(1), Wu H, Smith JD, Nickerson DA, Romieu I, London SJ, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

While copy number variation (CNV) is an active area of research, de novo mutation
rates within human populations are not well characterized. By focusing on large
(>100 kbp) events, we estimate the rate of de novo CNV formation in humans by
analyzing 4394 transmissions from human pedigrees with and without neurocognitive
disease. We show that a significant limitation in directly measuring genome-wide 
CNV mutation is accessing DNA derived from primary tissues as opposed to cell
lines. We conservatively estimated the genome-wide CNV mutation rate using single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarrays to analyze whole-blood derived DNA from
asthmatic trios, a collection in which we observed no elevation in the prevalence
of large CNVs. At a resolution of [?]30 kb, nine de novo CNVs were observed from
772 transmissions, corresponding to a mutation rate of m = 1.2 x 10(-2) CNVs per 
genome per transmission (m = 6.5 x 10(-3) for CNVs >500 kb). Combined with
previous estimates of CNV prevalence and assuming a model of mutation-selection
balance, we estimate significant purifying selection for large (>500 kb) events
at the genome-wide level to be s = 0.16. Supporting this, we identify de novo
CNVs in 717 multiplex autism pedigrees from the AGRE collection and observe a
fourfold enrichment (P = 1.4 x 10(-3)) for de novo CNVs in cases of multiplex
autism versus unaffected siblings, suggesting that many de novo CNV mutations
contribute a subtle, but significant risk for autism. We observe no parental bias
in the origin or transmission of CNVs among any of the cohorts studied.

PMCID: PMC2963811
PMID: 20841430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2010 Sep;31(7):582-91. doi: 10.1097/DBP.0b013e3181ee384e.

Epigenetics, copy number variation, and other molecular mechanisms underlying
neurodevelopmental disabilities: new insights and diagnostic approaches.

Gropman AL(1), Batshaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC
20010, USA. agropman@cnmc.org

The diagnostic evaluation of children with intellectual disability (ID) and other
neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD) has become increasingly complex in recent
years owing to a number of newly recognized genetic mechanisms and sophisticated 
methods to diagnose them. Previous studies have attempted to address the
diagnostic yield of finding a genetic cause in ID. The results have varied widely
from 10% to 81%, with the highest percentage being found in studies using new
array comparative genomic hybridization methodology especially in autism.
Although many cases of ID/NDD result from chromosomal aneuploidy or structural
rearrangements, single gene disorders and new categories of genome modification, 
including epigenetics and copy number variation play an increasingly important
role in diagnosis and testing. Epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and
modifications to histone proteins, regulate high-order DNA structure and gene
expression. Aberrant epigenetic and copy number variation mechanisms are involved
in several neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders including Rett
syndrome, fragile X syndrome, and microdeletion syndromes. This review will
describe a number of the molecular genetic mechanisms that play a role in
disorders leading to ID/NDD and will discuss the categories and technologies for 
diagnostic testing of these conditions.

PMID: 20814257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genet Med. 2010 Oct;12(10):641-7. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181ef4286.

Recurrent 200-kb deletions of 16p11.2 that include the SH2B1 gene are associated 
with developmental delay and obesity.

Bachmann-Gagescu R(1), Mefford HC, Cowan C, Glew GM, Hing AV, Wallace S, Bader
PI, Hamati A, Reitnauer PJ, Smith R, Stockton DW, Muhle H, Helbig I, Eichler EE, 
Ballif BC, Rosenfeld J, Tsuchiya KD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.

PURPOSE: The short arm of chromosome 16 is rich in segmental duplications,
predisposing this region of the genome to a number of recurrent rearrangements.
Genomic imbalances of an approximately 600-kb region in 16p11.2 (29.5-30.1 Mb)
have been associated with autism, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, 
and schizophrenia. However, a separate, distal 200-kb region in 16p11.2
(28.7-28.9 Mb) that includes the SH2B1 gene has been recently associated with
isolated obesity. The purpose of this study was to better define the phenotype of
this recurrent SH2B1-containing microdeletion in a cohort of phenotypically
abnormal patients not selected for obesity.
METHODS: Array comparative hybridization was performed on a total of 23,084
patients in a clinical setting for a variety of indications, most commonly
developmental delay.
RESULTS: Deletions of the SH2B1-containing region were identified in 31 patients.
The deletion is enriched in the patient population when compared with controls (P
= 0.003), with both inherited and de novo events. Detailed clinical information
was available for six patients, who all had developmental delays of varying
severity. Body mass index was [?]95th percentile in four of six patients,
supporting the previously described association with obesity. The reciprocal
duplication, found in 17 patients, does not seem to be significantly enriched in 
our patient population compared with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Deletions of the 16p11.2 SH2B1-containing region are pathogenic and 
are associated with developmental delay in addition to obesity.

PMID: 20808231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genet Med. 2010 Nov;12(11):694-702. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181f0c5f3.

Copy number variations associated with autism spectrum disorders contribute to a 
spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Ballif BC, Torchia BS, Sahoo T, Ravnan JB, Schultz R, Lamb A,
Bejjani BA, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, Washington 99207, USA.

PURPOSE: Autism spectrum disorders represent a range of neurodevelopmental
disorders that have been shown to have a strong genetic etiological component.
Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization and other molecular
cytogenetic techniques are discovering an increasing number of copy number
variations in individuals with autism spectrum disorder.
METHODS: We examined the yield of abnormal microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization findings in our laboratory for individuals referred for testing for
autism spectrum disorder. We also examined the presence of autistic features
among 151 additional individuals who were referred for microarray-based
comparative genomic hybridization testing for indications other than autism
spectrum disorder but had genomic alterations overlapping those found in cases
referred for autism spectrum disorder.
RESULTS: We identified 1461 individuals referred for testing for autism spectrum 
disorder, with likely significant abnormalities reported in approximately 11.6%
of individuals analyzed with whole-genome arrays. These abnormalities include
alterations that encompass novel candidate genes such as SNTG2, SOX5, HFE, and
TRIP38. A minority of individuals with overlapping abnormalities (19%) had
autistic features, and many of the copy number variations identified in our study
are inherited (69% among those found in individuals with autism spectrum
disorder).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest these copy number variations are one of multiple
factors contributing to the development of an autism spectrum disorder phenotype.
Additionally, the broad phenotypic spectrum of the patients with these copy
number variations suggests that these copy number variations are not autism
spectrum disorder-specific but likely more generally impair neurodevelopment.

PMID: 20808228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Oct 15;19(R2):R176-87. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq366. Epub 2010 Aug
31.

Phenotypic variability and genetic susceptibility to genomic disorders.

Girirajan S(1), Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, 3720 15th Avenue NE, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The duplication architecture of the human genome predisposes our species to
recurrent copy number variation and disease. Emerging data suggest that this
mechanism of mutation contributes to both common and rare diseases. Two features 
regarding this form of mutation have emerged. First, common structural
polymorphisms create susceptible and protective chromosomal architectures. These 
structural polymorphisms occur at varying frequencies in populations, leading to 
different susceptibility and ethnic predilection. Second, a subset of
rearrangements shows extreme variability in expressivity. We propose that two
types of genomic disorders may be distinguished: syndromic forms where the
phenotypic features are largely invariant and those where the same molecular
lesion associates with a diverse set of diagnoses including epilepsy,
schizophrenia, autism, intellectual disability and congenital malformations. Copy
number variation analyses of patient genomes reveal that disease type and
severity may be explained by the occurrence of additional rare events and their
inheritance within families. We propose that the overall burden of copy number
variants creates differing sensitized backgrounds during development leading to
different thresholds and disease outcomes. We suggest that the accumulation of
multiple high-penetrant alleles of low frequency may serve as a more general
model for complex genetic diseases, posing a significant challenge for
diagnostics and disease management.

PMCID: PMC2953748
PMID: 20807775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Autism Res. 2010 Aug;3(4):196-7. doi: 10.1002/aur.149.

Autism spectrum disorder: unbroken mirror neurons; rare copy number variants.

Cook EH Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Edwin H. Cook, Institute for Juvenile Research, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Illinois at Chicago,Chicago, IL 60608, USA. ecook@psych.uic.edu

PMID: 20803727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Psychiatr Genet. 2010 Oct;20(5):229-68. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32833d17c3.

Selected summaries from the XVII World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, San
Diego, California, USA, 4-8 November 2009.

Amstadter AB, Balachandar V, Bergen SE, Ceulemans S, Christensen JH, Cole J,
Dagdan E, De Luca V, Ducci F, Tee SF, Hartz S, Keers R, Medland S, Melas PA,
Muhleisen TW, Ozomaro U, Pidsley R, Scott AP, Sha L, Talati A, Teltsh O, Videtic 
A, Wang K, Wong CC, Delisi LE.

Erratum in
    Psychiatr Genet. 2011 Feb;21(1):55. Dagdan, Elif [added].

The XVII World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics, sponsored by The International
Society of Psychiatric Genetics (ISPG) took place in San Diego, California from 4
to 8 November 2009. Approximately 550 participants gathered to discuss the latest
molecular genetic findings relevant to serious mental illness, including
schizophrenia, mood disorders, substance abuse, autism, and attention deficit
disorder. Recent advances in the field were discussed, including the genome-wide 
association studies results, copy number variation (CNV) in the genome, genomic
imaging, and large multicenter collaborations. The following report, written by
junior travel awardees who were assigned sessions as rapporteurs represents some 
of the areas covered in oral presentation during the conference, and reports on
some of the notable major new findings described at this 2009 World Congress of
Psychiatric Genetics.

PMID: 20706171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Aug 13;87(2):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.013.

Microdeletions of 3q29 confer high risk for schizophrenia.

Mulle JG(1), Dodd AF, McGrath JA, Wolyniec PS, Mitchell AA, Shetty AC, Sobreira
NL, Valle D, Rudd MK, Satten G, Cutler DJ, Pulver AE, Warren ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. jmulle@emory.edu

Schizophrenia (SZ) is a severe psychiatric illness that affects approximately 1% 
of the population and has a strong genetic underpinning. Recently, genome-wide
analysis of copy-number variation (CNV) has implicated rare and de novo events as
important in SZ. Here, we report a genome-wide analysis of 245 SZ cases and 490
controls, all of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Because many studies have found an
excess burden of large, rare deletions in cases, we limited our analysis to
deletions over 500 kb in size. We observed seven large, rare deletions in cases, 
with 57% of these being de novo. We focused on one 836 kb de novo deletion at
chromosome 3q29 that falls within a 1.3-1.6 Mb deletion previously identified in 
children with intellectual disability (ID) and autism, because increasing
evidence suggests an overlap of specific rare copy-number variants (CNVs) between
autism and SZ. By combining our data with prior CNV studies of SZ and analysis of
the data of the Genetic Association Information Network (GAIN), we identified six
3q29 deletions among 7545 schizophrenic subjects and one among 39,748 controls,
resulting in a statistically significant association with SZ (p = 0.02) and an
odds ratio estimate of 17 (95% confidence interval: 1.36-1198.4). Moreover, this 
3q29 deletion region contains two linkage peaks from prior SZ family studies, and
the minimal deletion interval implicates 20 annotated genes, including PAK2 and
DLG1, both paralogous to X-linked ID genes and now strong candidates for SZ
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2917706
PMID: 20691406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Oct 15;19(20):4072-82. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq307. Epub 2010 Jul
27.

A genome-wide scan for common alleles affecting risk for autism.

Anney R, Klei L, Pinto D, Regan R, Conroy J, Magalhaes TR, Correia C, Abrahams
BS, Sykes N, Pagnamenta AT, Almeida J, Bacchelli E, Bailey AJ, Baird G, Battaglia
A, Berney T, Bolshakova N, Bolte S, Bolton PF, Bourgeron T, Brennan S, Brian J,
Carson AR, Casallo G, Casey J, Chu SH, Cochrane L, Corsello C, Crawford EL,
Crossett A, Dawson G, de Jonge M, Delorme R, Drmic I, Duketis E, Duque F, Estes
A, Farrar P, Fernandez BA, Folstein SE, Fombonne E, Freitag CM, Gilbert J,
Gillberg C, Glessner JT, Goldberg J, Green J, Guter SJ, Hakonarson H, Heron EA,
Hill M, Holt R, Howe JL, Hughes G, Hus V, Igliozzi R, Kim C, Klauck SM, Kolevzon 
A, Korvatska O, Kustanovich V, Lajonchere CM, Lamb JA, Laskawiec M, Leboyer M, Le
Couteur A, Leventhal BL, Lionel AC, Liu XQ, Lord C, Lotspeich L, Lund SC,
Maestrini E, Mahoney W, Mantoulan C, Marshall CR, McConachie H, McDougle CJ,
McGrath J, McMahon WM, Melhem NM, Merikangas A, Migita O, Minshew NJ, Mirza GK,
Munson J, Nelson SF, Noakes C, Noor A, Nygren G, Oliveira G, Papanikolaou K, Parr
JR, Parrini B, Paton T, Pickles A, Piven J, Posey DJ, Poustka A, Poustka F,
Prasad A, Ragoussis J, Renshaw K, Rickaby J, Roberts W, Roeder K, Roge B, Rutter 
ML, Bierut LJ, Rice JP, Salt J, Sansom K, Sato D, Segurado R, Senman L, Shah N,
Sheffield VC, Soorya L, Sousa I, Stoppioni V, Strawbridge C, Tancredi R, Tansey
K, Thiruvahindrapduram B, Thompson AP, Thomson S, Tryfon A, Tsiantis J, Van
Engeland H, Vincent JB, Volkmar F, Wallace S, Wang K, Wang Z, Wassink TH, Wing K,
Wittemeyer K, Wood S, Yaspan BL, Zurawiecki D, Zwaigenbaum L, Betancur C, Buxbaum
JD, Cantor RM, Cook EH, Coon H, Cuccaro ML, Gallagher L, Geschwind DH, Gill M,
Haines JL, Miller J, Monaco AP, Nurnberger JI Jr, Paterson AD, Pericak-Vance MA, 
Schellenberg GD, Scherer SW, Sutcliffe JS, Szatmari P, Vicente AM, Vieland VJ,
Wijsman EM, Devlin B, Ennis S, Hallmayer J.

Although autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have a substantial genetic basis, most 
of the known genetic risk has been traced to rare variants, principally copy
number variants (CNVs). To identify common risk variation, the Autism Genome
Project (AGP) Consortium genotyped 1558 rigorously defined ASD families for 1
million single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and analyzed these SNP genotypes
for association with ASD. In one of four primary association analyses, the
association signal for marker rs4141463, located within MACROD2, crossed the
genome-wide association significance threshold of P < 5 x 10(-8). When a smaller 
replication sample was analyzed, the risk allele at rs4141463 was again
over-transmitted; yet, consistent with the winner's curse, its effect size in the
replication sample was much smaller; and, for the combined samples, the
association signal barely fell below the P < 5 x 10(-8) threshold. Exploratory
analyses of phenotypic subtypes yielded no significant associations after
correction for multiple testing. They did, however, yield strong signals within
several genes, KIAA0564, PLD5, POU6F2, ST8SIA2 and TAF1C.

PMCID: PMC2947401
PMID: 20663923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Oct 1;68(7):649-56. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.04.018.
Epub 2010 Jun 19.

De novo truncating mutation in Kinesin 17 associated with schizophrenia.

Tarabeux J(1), Champagne N, Brustein E, Hamdan FF, Gauthier J, Lapointe M, Maios 
C, Piton A, Spiegelman D, Henrion E; Synapse to Disease Team, Millet B, Rapoport 
JL, Delisi LE, Joober R, Fathalli F, Fombonne E, Mottron L, Forget-Dubois N,
Boivin M, Michaud JL, Lafreniere RG, Drapeau P, Krebs MO, Rouleau GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center of Excellence in Neuromics of Universite de
Montreal, Centre Hospitalier de l'Universite de Montreal Research Center,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia (SCZ) is one of the most disabling psychiatric
disorders. It is thought to be due to a complex interplay between polygenic and
various environmental risk factors, although recent reports on genomic copy
number variations suggest that a fraction of the cases could result from variably
penetrant de novo variants. The gene encoding the synaptic motor protein kinesin 
17 (KIF17) involved in glutamatergic synapse is a candidate gene for SCZ.
METHODS: As part of our Synapse to Disease project, we resequenced KIF17 in a
cohort of individuals with sporadic SCZ (188 subjects). Additional populations
included autism spectrum disorder (142 subjects), nonsyndromic mental retardation
(95 subjects), and control subjects (568 subjects). Functional validation of the 
human mutation was done in developing zebrafish.
RESULTS: Here we report the identification of a de novo nonsense truncating
mutation in one patient with SCZ, in kinesin 17, a synaptic motor protein. No de 
novo or truncating KIF17 mutations were found in the additional samples. We
further validated the pathogenic nature of this mutation by knocking down its
expression in zebrafish embryos, which resulted in a developmental defect.
CONCLUSIONS: Together our findings suggest that disruption of KIF17, although
rare, could result in a schizophrenia phenotype and emphasize the possible
involvement of rare de novo mutations in this disorder.

Copyright (c) 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20646681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Sep 1;19(17):3477-81. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq259. Epub 2010 Jun 
29.

Penetrance for copy number variants associated with schizophrenia.

Vassos E(1), Collier DA, Holden S, Patch C, Rujescu D, St Clair D, Lewis CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, MRC SGDP Centre, King's College London, London, UK.
evangelos.vassos@iop.kcl.ac.uk

The discovery of 'high-risk' de novo copy number variants (CNVs) associated with 
neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia offers the opportunity to
translate these findings into useful tools for clinical geneticists. However,
this will require estimation of penetrance for these variants, which has not yet 
been properly considered. To facilitate this process, we estimated the penetrance
of CNVs associated with schizophrenia, at 15q13.3, 1q21.1, 15q11.2, 17p12,
2p16.3, 16p13.1 and 16p11.2 with a novel Bayesian method applied to pooled data
from published case-control studies. For these CNVs, penetrance for schizophrenia
was between 2 and 7.4%, which contrasts with the much higher penetrance for
schizophrenia of the 22q11.2 deletions found in velo-cardio-facial syndrome. The 
highest penetrance was for 15q13.3 deletion (6-9% in individual studies) and the 
lowest was for 15q11.2 (2%). CNVs confer much higher risk for schizophrenia than 
common variants, but their penetrance is substantially lower than Mendelian
disorders or other syndromic conditions. Since these CNVs predispose to multiple 
disorders, including epilepsy, autism and intellectual impairment, penetrance
estimates will also need to take into account diagnostic specificity, and their
overall penetrance for any neuropsychiatric disorder is likely to be much higher.
Thus, although CNVs are still far from being clinically useful or relevant to
genetic counselling for specific disorders, their detection may hold an important
clinical value in predicting negative developmental outcomes.

PMID: 20587603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Psychiatr Danub. 2010 Jun;22(2):190-2.

New technologies provide insights into genetic basis of psychiatric disorders and
explain their co-morbidity.

Rudan I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Croatian Centre for Global Health, The University of Edinburgh, UK.
irudan@hotmail.com

The completion of Human Genome Project and the "HapMap" project was followed by
translational activities from companies within the private sector. This led to
the introduction of genome-wide scans based on hundreds of thousands of single
nucleotide polymorphysms (SNP). These scans were based on common genetic variants
in human populations. This new and powerful technology was then applied to the
existing DNA-based datasets with information on psychiatric disorders. As a
result, an unprecedented amount of novel scientific insights related to the
underlying biology and genetics of psychiatric disorders was obtained. The
dominant design of these studies, so called "genome-wide association studies"
(GWAS), used statistical methods which minimized the risk of false positive
reports and provided much greater power to detect genotype-phenotype
associations. All findings were entirely data-driven rather than
hypothesis-driven, which often made it difficult for researchers to understand or
interpret the findings. Interestingly, this work in genetics is indicating how
non-specific some genes are for psychiatric disorders, having associations in
common for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and autism. This suggests that the
earlier stages of psychiatric disorders may be multi-valent and that early
detection, coupled with a clearer understanding of the environmental factors, may
allow prevention. At the present time, the rich "harvest" from GWAS still has
very limited power to predict the variation in psychiatric disease status at
individual level, typically explaining less than 5% of the total risk variance.
The most recent studies of common genetic variation implicated the role of major 
histocompatibility complex in schizophrenia and other disorders. They also
provided molecular evidence for a substantial polygenic component to the risk of 
psychiatric diseases, involving thousands of common alleles of very small effect.
The studies of structural genetic variation, such as copy number variants (CNV), 
coupled with the efforts targeting rare genetic variation (using the emerging
whole-genome "deep" sequencing technologies) will become the area of the greatest
interest in the field of genetic epidemiology. This will be complemented by the
studies of epigenetic phoenomena, changes of expression at a large scale and
understanding gene-gene interactions in complex networks using systems biology
approaches. A deeper understanding of the underlying biology of psychiatric
disorders is essential to improve diagnoses and therapies of these diseases. New 
technologies - genome-wide association studies, imaging and the optical
manipulation of neural circuits - are promising to provide novel insights and
lead to new treatments.

PMID: 20562745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nature. 2010 Jul 15;466(7304):368-72. doi: 10.1038/nature09146. Epub 2010 Jun 9.

Functional impact of global rare copy number variation in autism spectrum
disorders.

Pinto D, Pagnamenta AT, Klei L, Anney R, Merico D, Regan R, Conroy J, Magalhaes
TR, Correia C, Abrahams BS, Almeida J, Bacchelli E, Bader GD, Bailey AJ, Baird G,
Battaglia A, Berney T, Bolshakova N, Bolte S, Bolton PF, Bourgeron T, Brennan S, 
Brian J, Bryson SE, Carson AR, Casallo G, Casey J, Chung BH, Cochrane L, Corsello
C, Crawford EL, Crossett A, Cytrynbaum C, Dawson G, de Jonge M, Delorme R, Drmic 
I, Duketis E, Duque F, Estes A, Farrar P, Fernandez BA, Folstein SE, Fombonne E, 
Freitag CM, Gilbert J, Gillberg C, Glessner JT, Goldberg J, Green A, Green J,
Guter SJ, Hakonarson H, Heron EA, Hill M, Holt R, Howe JL, Hughes G, Hus V,
Igliozzi R, Kim C, Klauck SM, Kolevzon A, Korvatska O, Kustanovich V, Lajonchere 
CM, Lamb JA, Laskawiec M, Leboyer M, Le Couteur A, Leventhal BL, Lionel AC, Liu
XQ, Lord C, Lotspeich L, Lund SC, Maestrini E, Mahoney W, Mantoulan C, Marshall
CR, McConachie H, McDougle CJ, McGrath J, McMahon WM, Merikangas A, Migita O,
Minshew NJ, Mirza GK, Munson J, Nelson SF, Noakes C, Noor A, Nygren G, Oliveira
G, Papanikolaou K, Parr JR, Parrini B, Paton T, Pickles A, Pilorge M, Piven J,
Ponting CP, Posey DJ, Poustka A, Poustka F, Prasad A, Ragoussis J, Renshaw K,
Rickaby J, Roberts W, Roeder K, Roge B, Rutter ML, Bierut LJ, Rice JP, Salt J,
Sansom K, Sato D, Segurado R, Sequeira AF, Senman L, Shah N, Sheffield VC, Soorya
L, Sousa I, Stein O, Sykes N, Stoppioni V, Strawbridge C, Tancredi R, Tansey K,
Thiruvahindrapduram B, Thompson AP, Thomson S, Tryfon A, Tsiantis J, Van Engeland
H, Vincent JB, Volkmar F, Wallace S, Wang K, Wang Z, Wassink TH, Webber C,
Weksberg R, Wing K, Wittemeyer K, Wood S, Wu J, Yaspan BL, Zurawiecki D,
Zwaigenbaum L, Buxbaum JD, Cantor RM, Cook EH, Coon H, Cuccaro ML, Devlin B,
Ennis S, Gallagher L, Geschwind DH, Gill M, Haines JL, Hallmayer J, Miller J,
Monaco AP, Nurnberger JI Jr, Paterson AD, Pericak-Vance MA, Schellenberg GD,
Szatmari P, Vicente AM, Vieland VJ, Wijsman EM, Scherer SW, Sutcliffe JS,
Betancur C.

The autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of conditions characterized by
impairments in reciprocal social interaction and communication, and the presence 
of restricted and repetitive behaviours. Individuals with an ASD vary greatly in 
cognitive development, which can range from above average to intellectual
disability. Although ASDs are known to be highly heritable ( approximately 90%), 
the underlying genetic determinants are still largely unknown. Here we analysed
the genome-wide characteristics of rare (<1% frequency) copy number variation in 
ASD using dense genotyping arrays. When comparing 996 ASD individuals of European
ancestry to 1,287 matched controls, cases were found to carry a higher global
burden of rare, genic copy number variants (CNVs) (1.19 fold, P = 0.012),
especially so for loci previously implicated in either ASD and/or intellectual
disability (1.69 fold, P = 3.4 x 10(-4)). Among the CNVs there were numerous de
novo and inherited events, sometimes in combination in a given family,
implicating many novel ASD genes such as SHANK2, SYNGAP1, DLGAP2 and the X-linked
DDX53-PTCHD1 locus. We also discovered an enrichment of CNVs disrupting
functional gene sets involved in cellular proliferation, projection and motility,
and GTPase/Ras signalling. Our results reveal many new genetic and functional
targets in ASD that may lead to final connected pathways.

PMCID: PMC3021798
PMID: 20531469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Lakartidningen. 2010 Apr 28-May 4;107(17):1144-9.

[Gene dosage array can even discover small chromosome changes. More children with
developmental deviations may be offered an etiological diagnosis].

[Article in Swedish]

Anderlid BM(1), Blennow E, Giacobini M, Nordgren A, Wincent J, Schoumans J,
Nordenskjold M.

Author information: 
(1)Institutionen for molekylar medicin och kirurgi, Karolinska institutet.

PMID: 20518381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS Genet. 2010 May 20;6(5):e1000962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000962.

Genome-wide copy number variation in epilepsy: novel susceptibility loci in
idiopathic generalized and focal epilepsies.

Mefford HC(1), Muhle H, Ostertag P, von Spiczak S, Buysse K, Baker C, Franke A,
Malafosse A, Genton P, Thomas P, Gurnett CA, Schreiber S, Bassuk AG, Guipponi M, 
Stephani U, Helbig I, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America. hmefford@u.washington.edu

Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders in humans with a
prevalence of 1% and a lifetime incidence of 3%. Several genes have been
identified in rare autosomal dominant and severe sporadic forms of epilepsy, but 
the genetic cause is unknown in the vast majority of cases. Copy number variants 
(CNVs) are known to play an important role in the genetic etiology of many
neurodevelopmental disorders, including intellectual disability (ID), autism, and
schizophrenia. Genome-wide studies of copy number variation in epilepsy have not 
been performed. We have applied whole-genome oligonucleotide array comparative
genomic hybridization to a cohort of 517 individuals with various idiopathic,
non-lesional epilepsies. We detected one or more rare genic CNVs in 8.9% of
affected individuals that are not present in 2,493 controls; five individuals had
two rare CNVs. We identified CNVs in genes previously implicated in other
neurodevelopmental disorders, including two deletions in AUTS2 and one deletion
in CNTNAP2. Therefore, our findings indicate that rare CNVs are likely to
contribute to a broad range of generalized and focal epilepsies. In addition, we 
find that 2.9% of patients carry deletions at 15q11.2, 15q13.3, or 16p13.11,
genomic hotspots previously associated with ID, autism, or schizophrenia. In
summary, our findings suggest common etiological factors for seemingly diverse
diseases such as ID, autism, schizophrenia, and epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC2873910
PMID: 20502679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nat Genet. 2010 Jun;42(6):489-91. doi: 10.1038/ng.589. Epub 2010 May 16.

Mutations in the SHANK2 synaptic scaffolding gene in autism spectrum disorder and
mental retardation.

Berkel S(1), Marshall CR, Weiss B, Howe J, Roeth R, Moog U, Endris V, Roberts W, 
Szatmari P, Pinto D, Bonin M, Riess A, Engels H, Sprengel R, Scherer SW, Rappold 
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2010 Dec;78(6):519-21.
    Nat Genet. 2010 Jun;42(6):478-9.

Using microarrays, we identified de novo copy number variations in the SHANK2
synaptic scaffolding gene in two unrelated individuals with autism-spectrum
disorder (ASD) and mental retardation. DNA sequencing of SHANK2 in 396
individuals with ASD, 184 individuals with mental retardation and 659 unaffected 
individuals (controls) revealed additional variants that were specific to ASD and
mental retardation cases, including a de novo nonsense mutation and seven rare
inherited changes. Our findings further link common genes between ASD and
intellectual disability.

PMID: 20473310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Brain Res Bull. 2010 Sep 30;83(3-4):93-102. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.04.009. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Genome-wide approaches to schizophrenia.

Duan J(1), Sanders AR, Gejman PV.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Psychiatric Genetics, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Northshore University HealthSystem Research Institute, 1001 University 
Place, Evanston, IL 60201, USA. jduan69@gmail.com

Schizophrenia (SZ) is a common and severe psychiatric disorder with both
environmental and genetic risk factors, and a high heritability. After over 20
years of molecular genetics research, new molecular strategies, primarily
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), have generated major tangible progress.
This new data provides evidence for: (1) a number of chromosomal regions with
common polymorphisms showing genome-wide association with SZ (the major
histocompatibility complex, MHC, region at 6p22-p21; 18q21.2; and 2q32.1). The
associated alleles present small odds ratios (the odds of a risk variant being
present in cases vs. controls) and suggest causative involvement of gene
regulatory mechanisms in SZ. (2) Polygenic inheritance. (3) Involvement of rare
(<1%) and large (>100kb) copy number variants (CNVs). (4) A genetic overlap of SZ
with autism and with bipolar disorder (BP) challenging the classical clinical
classifications. Most new SZ findings (chromosomal regions and genes) have
generated new biological leads. These new findings, however, still need to be
translated into a better understanding of the underlying biology and into causal 
mechanisms. Furthermore, a considerable amount of heritability still remains
unexplained (missing heritability). Deep resequencing for rare variants and
system biology approaches (e.g., integrating DNA sequence and functional data)
are expected to further improve our understanding of the genetic architecture of 
SZ and its underlying biology.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2941569
PMID: 20433910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Neurology. 2010 May 18;74(20):1583-90. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181e0f147. Epub
2010 Apr 28.

Tourette syndrome is associated with recurrent exonic copy number variants.

Sundaram SK(1), Huq AM, Wilson BJ, Chugani HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI,
USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2010 May 18;74(20):1564-5.

BACKGROUND: Multiple rare copy number variants (CNVs) including genomic deletions
and duplications play a prominent role in neurodevelopmental disorders such as
mental retardation, autism, and schizophrenia, but have not been systematically
studied in Tourette syndrome (TS).
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide screening of single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) genotyping microarray data to identify recurrent or de novo rare exonic
CNVs in a case-control association study of patients with TS.
RESULTS: We identified 5 exon-affecting rare CNVs that are either de novo or
recurrent in 10 out of 111 patients with TS but were not found in 73 ethnically
matched controls or in the entries of the Database of Genomic Variants
(containing 21,178 CNVs at 6,558 loci). Three out of the 5 CNVs have been
implicated previously by other studies in schizophrenia, autism, and
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, suggesting that these CNVs produce a
continuum of neuropsychiatric disturbances that manifest in different ways
depending on other genetic, environmental, or stochastic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Rare, recurrent exonic copy number variants are associated in a
subset of patients with Tourette syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2876824
PMID: 20427753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Apr 22;6(4):e1000752. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000752.

Accurate distinction of pathogenic from benign CNVs in mental retardation.

Hehir-Kwa JY(1), Wieskamp N, Webber C, Pfundt R, Brunner HG, Gilissen C, de Vries
BB, Ponting CP, Veltman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Human Genetics,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;10(6):717-21.

Copy number variants (CNVs) have recently been recognized as a common form of
genomic variation in humans. Hundreds of CNVs can be detected in any individual
genome using genomic microarrays or whole genome sequencing technology, but their
phenotypic consequences are still poorly understood. Rare CNVs have been reported
as a frequent cause of neurological disorders such as mental retardation (MR),
schizophrenia and autism, prompting widespread implementation of CNV screening in
diagnostics. In previous studies we have shown that, in contrast to benign CNVs, 
MR-associated CNVs are significantly enriched in genes whose mouse orthologues,
when disrupted, result in a nervous system phenotype. In this study we developed 
and validated a novel computational method for differentiating between benign and
MR-associated CNVs using structural and functional genomic features to annotate
each CNV. In total 13 genomic features were included in the final version of a
Naive Bayesian Tree classifier, with LINE density and mouse knock-out phenotypes 
contributing most to the classifier's accuracy. After demonstrating that our
method (called GECCO) perfectly classifies CNVs causing known MR-associated
syndromes, we show that it achieves high accuracy (94%) and negative predictive
value (99%) on a blinded test set of more than 1,200 CNVs from a large cohort of 
individuals with MR. These results indicate that this classification method will 
be of value for objectively prioritizing CNVs in clinical research and
diagnostics.

PMCID: PMC2858682
PMID: 20421931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010 Apr;67(4):318-27. doi:
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.25.

Rare copy number variants: a point of rarity in genetic risk for bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia.

Grozeva D(1), Kirov G, Ivanov D, Jones IR, Jones L, Green EK, St Clair DM, Young 
AH, Ferrier N, Farmer AE, McGuffin P, Holmans PA, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Craddock
N; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium.

Collaborators: Burton PR, Cardon LR, Clayton DG, Craddock N, Deloukas P,
Duncanson A, Kwiatkowski DP, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand WH, Samani NJ, Todd JA,
Donnelly P, Barrett JC, Burton PR, Davison D, Donnelly P, Easton D, Evans DM,
Leung HT, Marchini JL, Morris AP, Spencer CC, Tobin MD, Cardon LR, Clayton DG,
Attwood AP, Boorman JP, Cant B, Hussey JM, Jolley JD, Knight AS, Koch K, Meech E,
Nutland S, Ouwehand WH, Prowse CV, Stevens HE, Taylor NC, Todd JA, Walker NM,
Walters GR, Watkins NA, Winzer T, Jones RW, McArdle WL, Ring SM, Pembrey M,
Strachan DP, Breen G, St Clair DM, Caesar S, Gordon-Smith K, Jones L, Craddock N,
Fraser C, Green EK, Grozeva D, Hamshere ML, Holmans PA, Jones IR, Kirov G,
Moskvina V, Nikolov I, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Collier DA, Elkin A, Farmer AE,
McGuffin P, Williamson R, Ferrier N, Young AH, Ball SG, Balmforth AJ, Barrett JH,
Bishop DT, Hall AS, Iles MM, Maqbool A, Yuldasheva N, Braund PS, Dixon RJ,
Mangino M, Samani NJ, Stevens S, Burton PR, Tobin MD, Thompson JR, Bredi F,
Parkes M, Tremelling M, Drummond H, Lees CW, Nimmo ER, Satsangi J, Fisher SA,
Lewis CM, Mathew CG, Onnie CM, Prescott NJ, Forbes A, Sanderson J, Barbour J,
Mansfield JC, Mohiuddin MK, Todhunter CE, Ahmad T, Cummings FR, Jewell DP,
Webster J, Brown MJ, Clayton DG, Lathrop GM, Connell J, Dominiczak A, Samani NJ, 
Marcano CA, Burke B, Caulfield M, Dobson R, Gungadoo J, Lee KL, Munroe PB,
Newhouse SJ, Onipinla A, Wallace C, Xue M, Farrall M, Barton A, Bruce IN, Donovan
H, Eyre S, Gilbert PD, Hider SL, Hinks AM, John SL, Potter C, Silman AJ, Symmons 
DP, Thomson W, Worthington J, Clayton DG, Nutland S, Stevens HE, Todd JA, Walker 
NM, Dunger DB, Widmer B, Frayling TM, Freathy RM, Hattersley AT, Lango H, Perry
JR, Weedon MN, Shields BM, Hitman GA, Walker M, Elliott KS, Lindgren CM, McCarthy
MI, Rayner NW, Zeggini E, Groves CJ, Timpson NJ, Newport M, Sirugo G, Hill AV,
Lyons E, Vannberg F, Bradbury LA, Pointon JJ, Farrar C, Wordsworth P, Brown MA,
Franklyn JA, Gough SC, Heward JM, Simmonds MJ, Rahman N, Seal S, Stratton MR, Ban
M, Compston A, Goris A, Sawcer SJ, Conway D, Jallow M, Newport M, Sirugo G,
Rockett KA, Kwiatkowski DP, Bumpstead SJ, Chaney A, Deloukas P, Downes K, Ghori
MJ, Gwilliam R, Hunt SE, Inouye M, Keniry A, King E, McGinnis R, Potter S,
Ravindrarajah R, Whittaker P, Widden C, Withers D, Leung HT, Nutland S, Stevens
HE, Todd JA, Walker NM, Easton D, Clayton DG, Burton PR, Tobin MD, Barrett JC,
Cardon LR, Evans DM, Morris AP, Cardin NJ, Davison D, Ferreira T, Hallgrimsdottir
IB, Howie BN, Marchini JL, Pereira-Gale J, Spencer CC, Su Z, Teo YY, Vukcevic D, 
Donnelly P, Bentley D, Brown MA, Cardon LR, Caulfield M, Clayton DG, Compston A, 
Craddock N, Deloukas P, Donnelly P, Farrall M, Gough SC, Hall AS, Hattersley AT, 
Hill AV, Kwiatkowski DP, Mathew CG, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand WH, Parkes M, Pembrey
M, Rahman N, Samani NJ, Stratton MR, Todd JA, Worthington J.

CONTEXT: Recent studies suggest that copy number variation in the human genome is
extensive and may play an important role in susceptibility to disease, including 
neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and autism. The possible
involvement of copy number variants (CNVs) in bipolar disorder has received
little attention to date.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether large (>100,000 base pairs) and rare (found in
<1% of the population) CNVs are associated with susceptibility to bipolar
disorder and to compare with findings in schizophrenia.
DESIGN: A genome-wide survey of large, rare CNVs in a case-control sample using a
high-density microarray.
SETTING: The Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium.
PARTICIPANTS: There were 1697 cases of bipolar disorder and 2806 nonpsychiatric
controls. All participants were white UK residents.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Overall load of CNVs and presence of rare CNVs.
RESULTS: The burden of CNVs in bipolar disorder was not increased compared with
controls and was significantly less than in schizophrenia cases. The CNVs
previously implicated in the etiology of schizophrenia were not more common in
cases with bipolar disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder differ with respect to CNV burden
in general and association with specific CNVs in particular. Our data are
consistent with the possibility that possession of large, rare deletions may
modify the phenotype in those at risk of psychosis: those possessing such events 
are more likely to be diagnosed as having schizophrenia, and those without them
are more likely to be diagnosed as having bipolar disorder.

PMID: 20368508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Clin Genet. 2010 Aug;78(2):175-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01371.x. Epub
2010 Jan 5.

De novo duplication of MECP2 in a girl with mental retardation and no obvious
dysmorphic features.

Makrythanasis P(1), Moix I, Gimelli S, Fluss J, Aliferis K, Antonarakis SE,
Morris MA, Bena F, Bottani A.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Loss-of-function mutations of MECP2 are responsible for Rett syndrome (RTT), an
X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder affecting mainly girls. The availability of 
MECP2 testing has led to the identification of such mutations in girls with
atypical RTT features and the recognition of milder forms. Furthermore,
duplication of the entire gene has recently been described in boys with mental
retardation and recurrent infections. We describe a girl with a heterozygous de
novo MECP2 duplication. The patient, at the age of 19, has mental retardation
with no autistic features. She is friendly but gets frequently anxious. She has
neither dysmorphic features nor malformations. Her motor development was delayed 
with walking at 20 months. Speech is fluid with good pronunciation but is simple 
and repetitive. Diagnosis was made after single-strand conformation analysis
(SSCA) and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis of
MECP2. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) analysis showed a
duplication of 29 kb including MECP2 and part of IRAK1. Fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) has revealed that the duplicated region is inserted near the
telomere of the short arm of chromosome 10. X-chromosome inactivation in
leukocyte DNA was not skewed. We conclude that it is likely that this MECP2
duplication is responsible for the mental retardation in this patient. This case 
broadens the phenotypic spectrum of MECP2 abnormalities with consequent
implication in diagnosis and genetic counselling of girls with non-syndromic
mental retardation.

PMID: 20236124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Med Genet. 2010 Mar-Apr;53(2):93-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.01.004. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Interstitial microduplication of Xp22.31: Causative of intellectual disability or
benign copy number variant?

Li F(1), Shen Y, Kohler U, Sharkey FH, Menon D, Coulleaux L, Malan V, Rio M,
McMullan DJ, Cox H, Fagan KA, Gaunt L, Metcalfe K, Heinrich U, Hislop G, Maye U, 
Sutcliffe M, Wu BL, Thiel BD, Mulchandani S, Conlin LK, Spinner NB, Murphy KM,
Batista DA.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

The use of comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays has dramatically altered the approach to identification
of genetic alterations that can explain intellectual disability and /or
congenital anomalies. However, the discovery of numerous copy number changes with
benign or unknown clinical significance has made interpretation problematic.
Submicroscopic duplication of Xp22.31 has been reported as either a possible
cause of intellectual disability and/or developmental delay or a benign variant. 
Here we report 29 individuals with the microduplication found as part of
microarray analysis of 7793 samples submitted to an international group of 13
clinical laboratories. The referral reasons varied and included developmental
delay, intellectual disability, autism, dysmorphic features and/or multiple
congenital anomalies. The size of the Xp22.31 duplication varied between 149 kb
and 1.74 Mb and included the steroid sulfatase (STS) gene with the male to female
ratio of 0.7. Duplication within this segment is seen at a frequency of 0.15% in 
a healthy control population, whereas a frequency of 0.37% was observed in our
cohort of individuals with abnormal phenotypes. We present a detailed comparison 
of the breakpoints, inheritance, X-inactivation and clinical phenotype in our
cohort and a review of the literature for a total of 41 patients. To date, this
report is the largest compilation of clinical and array data regarding the
microduplication of Xp22.31 and will serve to broaden the knowledge of regions
involving copy number variation (CNV).

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20132918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 26;107 Suppl 1:1765-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906222107. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Evolution in health and medicine Sackler colloquium: Genomic disorders: a window 
into human gene and genome evolution.

Carvalho CM(1), Zhang F, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Gene duplications alter the genetic constitution of organisms and can be a
driving force of molecular evolution in humans and the great apes. In this
context, the study of genomic disorders has uncovered the essential role played
by the genomic architecture, especially low copy repeats (LCRs) or segmental
duplications (SDs). In fact, regardless of the mechanism, LCRs can mediate or
stimulate rearrangements, inciting genomic instability and generating dynamic and
unstable regions prone to rapid molecular evolution. In humans, copy-number
variation (CNV) has been implicated in common traits such as neuropathy,
hypertension, color blindness, infertility, and behavioral traits including
autism and schizophrenia, as well as disease susceptibility to HIV, lupus
nephritis, and psoriasis among many other clinical phenotypes. The same
mechanisms implicated in the origin of genomic disorders may also play a role in 
the emergence of segmental duplications and the evolution of new genes by means
of genomic and gene duplication and triplication, exon shuffling, exon accretion,
and fusion/fission events.

PMCID: PMC2868291
PMID: 20080665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Annu Rev Med. 2010;61:437-55. doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-100708-204735.

Structural variation in the human genome and its role in disease.

Stankiewicz P(1), Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

During the last quarter of the twentieth century, our knowledge about human
genetic variation was limited mainly to the heterochromatin polymorphisms, large 
enough to be visible in the light microscope, and the single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) identified by traditional PCR-based DNA sequencing. In the
past five years, the rapid development and expanded use of microarray
technologies, including oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization
and SNP genotyping arrays, as well as next-generation sequencing with
"paired-end" methods, has enabled a whole-genome analysis with essentially
unlimited resolution. The discovery of submicroscopic copy-number variations
(CNVs) present in our genomes has changed dramatically our perspective on DNA
structural variation and disease. It is now thought that CNVs encompass more
total nucleotides and arise more frequently than SNPs. CNVs, to a larger extent
than SNPs, have been shown to be responsible for human evolution, genetic
diversity between individuals, and a rapidly increasing number of traits or
susceptibility to traits; such conditions have been referred to as genomic
disorders. In addition to well-known sporadic chromosomal microdeletion syndromes
and Mendelian diseases, many common complex traits including autism and
schizophrenia can result from CNVs. Both recombination- and replication-based
mechanisms for CNV formation have been described.

PMID: 20059347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 17;109(3):E103-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1106233109. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Reducing system noise in copy number data using principal components of self-self
hybridizations.

Lee YH(1), Ronemus M, Kendall J, Lakshmi B, Leotta A, Levy D, Esposito D, Grubor 
V, Ye K, Wigler M, Yamrom B.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA.

Genomic copy number variation underlies genetic disorders such as autism,
schizophrenia, and congenital heart disease. Copy number variations are commonly 
detected by array based comparative genomic hybridization of sample to reference 
DNAs, but probe and operational variables combine to create correlated system
noise that degrades detection of genetic events. To correct for this we have
explored hybridizations in which no genetic signal is expected, namely
"self-self" hybridizations (SSH) comparing DNAs from the same genome. We show
that SSH trap a variety of correlated system noise present also in
sample-reference (test) data. Through singular value decomposition of SSH, we are
able to determine the principal components (PCs) of this noise. The PCs
themselves offer deep insights into the sources of noise, and facilitate
detection of artifacts. We present evidence that linear and piecewise linear
correction of test data with the PCs does not introduce detectable spurious
signal, yet improves signal-to-noise metrics, reduces false positives, and
facilitates copy number determination.

PMCID: PMC3271883
PMID: 22207624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar 1;71(5):392-402. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.09.034.
Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Rare copy number variants in tourette syndrome disrupt genes in histaminergic
pathways and overlap with autism.

Fernandez TV(1), Sanders SJ, Yurkiewicz IR, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Kim YS, Fishman
DO, Raubeson MJ, Song Y, Yasuno K, Ho WS, Bilguvar K, Glessner J, Chu SH, Leckman
JF, King RA, Gilbert DL, Heiman GA, Tischfield JA, Hoekstra PJ, Devlin B,
Hakonarson H, Mane SM, Gunel M, State MW.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar 1;71(5):390-1.

BACKGROUND: Studies of copy number variation (CNV) have characterized loci and
molecular pathways in a range of neuropsychiatric conditions. We analyzed rare
CNVs in Tourette syndrome (TS) to identify novel risk regions and relevant
pathways, to evaluate burden of structural variation in cases versus controls,
and to assess overlap of identified variations with those in other
neuropsychiatric syndromes.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study of 460 individuals with TS, including 
148 parent-child trios and 1131 controls. CNV analysis was undertaken using 370 K
to 1 M probe arrays, and genotyping data were used to match cases and controls
for ancestry. CNVs present in < 1% of the population were evaluated.
RESULTS: While there was no significant increase in the number of de novo or
transmitted rare CNVs in cases versus controls, pathway analysis using multiple
algorithms showed enrichment of genes within histamine receptor (subtypes 1 and
2) signaling pathways (p = 5.8 x 10(-4) - 1.6 x 10(-2)), as well as axon
guidance, cell adhesion, nervous system development, and synaptic structure and
function processes. Genes mapping within rare CNVs in TS showed significant
overlap with those previously identified in autism spectrum disorders but not
intellectual disability or schizophrenia. Three large, likely pathogenic, de novo
events were identified, including one disrupting multiple gamma-aminobutyric acid
receptor genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We identify further evidence supporting recent findings regarding
the involvement of histaminergic and gamma-aminobutyric acidergic mechanisms in
the etiology of TS and show an overlap of rare CNVs in TS and autism spectrum
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3282144
PMID: 22169095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(Database issue):D1016-22. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkr1145. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

AutismKB: an evidence-based knowledgebase of autism genetics.

Xu LM(1), Li JR, Huang Y, Zhao M, Tang X, Wei L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics, State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene
Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder
with a prevalence of 0.9-2.6%. Twin studies showed a heritability of 38-90%,
indicating strong genetic contributions. Yet it is unclear how many genes have
been associated with ASD and how strong the evidence is. A comprehensive review
and analysis of literature and data may bring a clearer big picture of autism
genetics. We show that as many as 2193 genes, 2806 SNPs/VNTRs, 4544 copy number
variations (CNVs) and 158 linkage regions have been associated with ASD by GWAS, 
genome-wide CNV studies, linkage analyses, low-scale genetic association studies,
expression profiling and other low-scale experimental studies. To evaluate the
evidence, we collected metadata about each study including clinical and
demographic features, experimental design and statistical significance, and used 
a scoring and ranking approach to select a core data set of 434 high-confidence
genes. The genes mapped to pathways including neuroactive ligand-receptor
interaction, synapse transmission and axon guidance. To better understand the
genes we parsed over 30 databases to retrieve extensive data about expression
patterns, protein interactions, animal models and pharmacogenetics. We
constructed a MySQL-based online database and share it with the broader autism
research community at http://autismkb.cbi.pku.edu.cn, supporting sophisticated
browsing and searching functionalities.

PMCID: PMC3245106
PMID: 22139918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Schizophr Res. 2012 Mar;135(1-3):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.11.004. Epub
2011 Nov 29.

Independent estimation of the frequency of rare CNVs in the UK population
confirms their role in schizophrenia.

Grozeva D(1), Conrad DF, Barnes CP, Hurles M, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Craddock N, 
Kirov G; WTCCC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine,
Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

BACKGROUND: Several large, rare chromosomal copy number variants (CNVs) have
recently been shown to increase risk for schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric
disorders including autism, ADHD, learning difficulties and epilepsy.
AIMS: We wanted to examine the frequencies of these schizophrenia-associated
variants in a large sample of individuals with non-psychiatric illnesses to
better understand the robustness and specificity of the association with
schizophrenia.
METHODS: We used Affymetrix 500K microarray data from 10,259 individuals from the
UK Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) who are affected with six
non-psychiatric disorders (coronary artery disease, Crohn's disease,
hypertension, rheumatoid arthritis, types 1 and 2 diabetes) to establish the
frequencies of nine CNV loci strongly implicated in schizophrenia, and compared
them with the previous findings.
RESULTS: Deletions at 1q21.1, 3q29, 15q11.2, 15q13.1 and 22q11.2 (VCFS region),
and duplications at 16p11.2 were found significantly more often in schizophrenia 
cases, compared with the WTCCC reference set. Deletions at 17p12 and 17q12, were 
also more common in schizophrenia cases but not significantly so, while
duplications at 16p13.1 were found at nearly the same rate as in previous
schizophrenia samples. The frequencies of CNVs in the WTCCC non-psychiatric
controls at three of the loci (15q11.2, 16p13.1 and 17p12) were significantly
higher than those reported in previous control populations.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence for association with schizophrenia is compelling for
six rare CNV loci, while the remaining three require further replication in large
studies. Risk at these loci extends to other neurodevelopmental disorders but
their involvement in common non-psychiatric disorders should also be
investigated.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3315675
PMID: 22130109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Epigenomics. 2011 Jun;3(3):345-59. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.19.

The imprinted brain: how genes set the balance between autism and psychosis.

Badcock C(1).

Author information: 
(1)London School of Economics, London, UK. c.badcock@lse.ac.uk

The imprinted brain theory proposes that autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
represents a paternal bias in the expression of imprinted genes. This is
reflected in a preference for mechanistic cognition and in the corresponding
mentalistic deficits symptomatic of ASD. Psychotic spectrum disorder (PSD) would 
correspondingly result from an imbalance in favor of maternal and/or X-chromosome
gene expression. If differences in gene expression were reflected locally in the 
human brain as mouse models and other evidence suggests they are, ASD would
represent not so much an 'extreme male brain' as an extreme paternal one, with
PSD correspondingly representing an extreme maternal brain. To the extent that
copy number variation resembles imprinting and aneuploidy in nullifying or
multiplying the expression of particular genes, it has been found to conform to
the diametric model of mental illness peculiar to the imprinted brain theory. The
fact that nongenetic factors such as nutrition in pregnancy can mimic and/or
interact with imprinted gene expression suggests that the theory might even be
able to explain the notable effect of maternal starvation on the risk of PSD -
not to mention the 'autism epidemic' of modern affluent societies. Finally, the
theory suggests that normality represents balanced cognition, and that genius is 
an extraordinary extension of cognitive configuration in both mentalistic and
mechanistic directions. Were it to be proven correct, the imprinted brain theory 
would represent one of the biggest single advances in our understanding of the
mind and of mental illness that has ever taken place, and would revolutionize
psychiatric diagnosis, prevention and treatment - not to mention our
understanding of epigenomics.

PMID: 22122342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Nov 25;12:154. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-154.

High frequency of known copy number abnormalities and maternal duplication
15q11-q13 in patients with combined schizophrenia and epilepsy.

Stewart LR(1), Hall AL, Kang SH, Shaw CA, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030 USA. abeaudet@bcm.edu

BACKGROUND: Many copy number variants (CNVs) are documented to be associated with
neuropsychiatric disorders, including intellectual disability, autism, epilepsy, 
schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. Chromosomal deletions of 1q21.1, 3q29,
15q13.3, 22q11.2, and NRXN1 and duplications of 15q11-q13 (maternal), 16p11, and 
16p13.3 have the strongest association with schizophrenia. We hypothesized that
cases with both schizophrenia and epilepsy would have a higher frequency of
disease-associated CNVs and would represent an enriched sample for detection of
other mutations associated with schizophrenia.
METHODS: We used array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) to analyze 235
individuals with both schizophrenia and epilepsy, 80 with bipolar disorder and
epilepsy, and 191 controls.
RESULTS: We detected 10 schizophrenia plus epilepsy cases in 235 (4.3%) with the 
above mentioned CNVs compared to 0 in 191 controls (p = 0.003). Other likely
pathological findings in schizophrenia plus epilepsy cases included 1 deletion
16p13 and 1 duplication 7q11.23 for a total of 12/235 (5.1%) while a possibly
pathogenic duplication of 22q11.2 was found in one control for a total of 1 in
191 (0.5%) controls (p = 0.008). The rate of abnormality in the schizophrenia
plus epilepsy of 10/235 for the more definite CNVs compares to a rate of 75/7336 
for these same CNVs in a series of unselected schizophrenia cases (p = 0.0004).
CONCLUSION: We found a statistically significant increase in the frequency of
CNVs known or likely to be associated with schizophrenia in individuals with both
schizophrenia and epilepsy compared to controls. We found an overall 5.1%
detection rate of likely pathological findings which is the highest frequency of 
such findings in a series of schizophrenia patients to date. This evidence
suggests that the frequency of disease-associated CNVs in patients with both
schizophrenia and epilepsy is significantly higher than for unselected
schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3239290
PMID: 22118685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002334. Epub 2011
Nov 10.

Relative burden of large CNVs on a range of neurodevelopmental phenotypes.

Girirajan S(1), Brkanac Z, Coe BP, Baker C, Vives L, Vu TH, Shafer N, Bernier R, 
Ferrero GB, Silengo M, Warren ST, Moreno CS, Fichera M, Romano C, Raskind WH,
Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

While numerous studies have implicated copy number variants (CNVs) in a range of 
neurological phenotypes, the impact relative to disease severity has been
difficult to ascertain due to small sample sizes, lack of phenotypic details, and
heterogeneity in platforms used for discovery. Using a customized microarray
enriched for genomic hotspots, we assayed for large CNVs among 1,227 individuals 
with various neurological deficits including dyslexia (376), sporadic autism
(350), and intellectual disability (ID) (501), as well as 337 controls. We show
that the frequency of large CNVs (>1 Mbp) is significantly greater for
ID-associated phenotypes compared to autism (p = 9.58 x 10(-11), odds ratio =
4.59), dyslexia (p = 3.81 x 10(-18), odds ratio = 14.45), or controls (p = 2.75 x
10(-17), odds ratio = 13.71). There is a striking difference in the frequency of 
rare CNVs (>50 kbp) in autism (10%, p = 2.4 x 10(-6), odds ratio = 6) or ID (16%,
p = 3.55 x 10(-12), odds ratio = 10) compared to dyslexia (2%) with essentially
no difference in large CNV burden among dyslexia patients compared to controls.
Rare CNVs were more likely to arise de novo (64%) in ID when compared to autism
(40%) or dyslexia (0%). We observed a significantly increased large CNV burden in
individuals with ID and multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) compared to ID alone 
(p = 0.001, odds ratio = 2.54). Our data suggest that large CNV burden positively
correlates with the severity of childhood disability: ID with MCA being most
severely affected and dyslexics being indistinguishable from controls. When
autism without ID was considered separately, the increase in CNV burden was
modest compared to controls (p = 0.07, odds ratio = 2.33).

PMCID: PMC3213131
PMID: 22102821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Jan;159B(1):61-71. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32002. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Evidence for involvement of GNB1L in autism.

Chen YZ(1), Matsushita M, Girirajan S, Lisowski M, Sun E, Sul Y, Bernier R, Estes
A, Dawson G, Minshew N, Shellenberg GD, Eichler EE, Rieder MJ, Nickerson DA,
Tsuang DW, Tsuang MT, Wijsman EM, Raskind WH, Brkanac Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Medical Genetics), University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington 98195-7720, USA.

Structural variations in the chromosome 22q11.2 region mediated by nonallelic
homologous recombination result in 22q11.2 deletion (del22q11.2) and 22q11.2
duplication (dup22q11.2) syndromes. The majority of del22q11.2 cases have facial 
and cardiac malformations, immunologic impairments, specific cognitive profile
and increased risk for schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). The
phenotype of dup22q11.2 is frequently without physical features but includes the 
spectrum of neurocognitive abnormalities. Although there is substantial evidence 
that haploinsufficiency for TBX1 plays a role in the physical features of
del22q11.2, it is not known which gene(s) in the critical 1.5 Mb region are
responsible for the observed spectrum of behavioral phenotypes. We identified an 
individual with a balanced translocation 46,XY,t(1;22)(p36.1;q11.2) and a
behavioral phenotype characterized by cognitive impairment, autism, and
schizophrenia in the absence of congenital malformations. Using somatic cell
hybrids and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) we mapped the chromosome-22
breakpoint within intron 7 of the GNB1L gene. Copy number evaluations and direct 
DNA sequencing of GNB1L in 271 schizophrenia and 513 autism cases revealed
dup22q11.2 in two families with autism and private GNB1L missense variants in
conserved residues in three families (P = 0.036). The identified missense
variants affect residues in the WD40 repeat domains and are predicted to have
deleterious effects on the protein. Prior studies provided evidence that GNB1L
may have a role in schizophrenia. Our findings support involvement of GNB1L in
ASDs as well.

Copyright (c) 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3270696
PMID: 22095694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;49(8):607-11.

[Copy-number variations of SHANK3 and related clinical phenotypes in children
with autism].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen BY(1), Zou XB, Zhang J, Deng HZ, Li JY, Li LY, Tang C, Zou YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Developmental-Behavioral Center, the Third Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510630, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore possible relationship between copy-number variations (CNVs)
in 15q11-13, 16p11 and SHANK3 gene by using multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) and the phenotypes in children with autism and to further
explore the clinical application of MLPA to make an etiological diagnosis of
Autism.
METHODS: The diagnosed of autism was made according to the criteria of the ICD-10
and DSM-IV, with typical cluster of symptoms comprise social disability,
communication impairments and repetitious behaviors. MLPA KIT P343-C1 AUTISM-1
was used to detect and describe the incidence of CNVs in these three domains.
RESULTS: Among 109 cases collected from 102 autistic pedigrees, 2 individuals had
SHANK3 microdeletion, accounting for approximately 2% (2/109) of cases,
suggesting the proportion of SHANK3 microdeletion might contribute to typical
autism. The phenotypic traits of patients with SHANK3 microdeletions showed
homogenicity in severe core symptoms and mental retardation.
CONCLUSIONS: SHANK3 microdeletion is an important genetics component for autism, 
which may explain 2% typical autism cases. SHANK3 microdeletion might explain
autistic core symptoms and mental retardation. MLPA is a sensitive and a high
throughput technique to detect CNVs in specific DNA segments, which is beneficial
for further investigation of etiology of autism.

PMID: 22093425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2011;135(3-4):228-40. doi: 10.1159/000334064. Epub 2011 Nov
12.

Disentangling the myriad genomics of complex disorders, specifically focusing on 
autism, epilepsy, and schizophrenia.

Poot M(1), van der Smagt JJ, Brilstra EH, Bourgeron T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands. m.poot@umcutrecht.nl

Analyses of structural genome variation by array-CGH have dramatically enhanced
our ability to detect copy number variations (CNVs). De novo CNVs and those
co-segregating with disease in a family are generally interpreted as pathogenic. 
Yet, often CNVs, such as recurrent microdeletions in region 15q13.3, are not so
clearly pathogenic. Here we discuss potential confounding mechanisms that may
lead to the phenotypic pleiotropy of CNVs, such as unmasking of recessive alleles
by hemizygous deletions, interaction of CNVs with other loci and genes, genetic
epistasis, allelic exclusion, and somatic mosaicism. We illustrate some of these 
mechanisms with a detailed analysis of recent studies of CNVs involving MCPH1,
AUTS2, CNTNAP2, and mutations in GRIN2B. Next we discuss the clinical
ramifications of these findings and urge workers to avoid 'diagnostic fatalism'
(i.e., halting all genetic investigation after the detection of a single CNV) and
address some of the future challenges likely to result from implementations of
next generation sequencing techniques.

Copyright (c) 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22085975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2011;135(3-4):174-202. doi: 10.1159/000332928. Epub 2011
Nov 2.

Genome arrays for the detection of copy number variations in idiopathic mental
retardation, idiopathic generalized epilepsy and neuropsychiatric disorders:
lessons for diagnostic workflow and research.

Hochstenbach R(1), Buizer-Voskamp JE, Vorstman JA, Ophoff RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, University
Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. phochste@umcutrecht.nl

We review the contributions and limitations of genome-wide array-based
identification of copy number variants (CNVs) in the clinical diagnostic
evaluation of patients with mental retardation (MR) and other brain-related
disorders. In unselected MR referrals a causative genomic gain or loss is
detected in 14-18% of cases. Usually, such CNVs arise de novo, are not found in
healthy subjects, and have a major impact on the phenotype by altering the dosage
of multiple genes. This high diagnostic yield justifies array-based segmental
aneuploidy screening as the initial genetic test in these patients. This also
pertains to patients with autism (expected yield about 5-10% in nonsyndromic and 
10-20% in syndromic patients) and schizophrenia (at least 5% yield). CNV studies 
in idiopathic generalized epilepsy, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder,
major depressive disorder and Tourette syndrome indicate that patients have, on
average, a larger CNV burden as compared to controls. Collectively, the CNV
studies suggest that a wide spectrum of disease-susceptibility variants exists,
most of which are rare (<0.1%) and of variable and usually small effect.
Notwithstanding, a rare CNV can have a major impact on the phenotype. Exome
sequencing in MR and autism patients revealed de novo mutations in protein coding
genes in 60 and 20% of cases, respectively. Therefore, it is likely that arrays
will be supplanted by next-generation sequencing methods as the initial and
perhaps ultimate diagnostic tool in patients with brain-related disorders,
revealing both CNVs and mutations in a single test.

Copyright (c) 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22056632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Med Genet. 2011 Dec;48(12):831-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100372. Epub 2011
Oct 29.

Pathogenic aberrations revealed exclusively by single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) genotyping data in 5000 samples tested by molecular karyotyping.

Bruno DL(1), White SM, Ganesamoorthy D, Burgess T, Butler K, Corrie S, Francis D,
Hills L, Prabhakara K, Ngo C, Norris F, Oertel R, Pertile MD, Stark Z, Amor DJ,
Slater HR.

Author information: 
(1)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Melbourne, Australia. damien.bruno@mcri.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Several recent studies have demonstrated the use of single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays for the investigation of intellectual disability,
developmental delay, autism or congenital abnormalities. In addition to LogR
'copy number' data, these arrays provide SNP genotyping data for gene level
autozygosity mapping, estimating low levels of mosaicism, assessing long
continuous stretches of homozygosity (LCSH), detection of uniparental disomy, and
'autozygous' regions. However, there remains little specific information on the
clinical utility of this genotyping data.
METHODS: Molecular karyotyping, using SNP array, was performed on 5000 clinical
samples.
RESULTS: Clinically significant 'LogR neutral' genotyping abnormalities were
detected in 0.5% of cases. Among these were a single case of chimerism, 12 cases 
with low level chromosome mosaicism, and 11 cases with an LCSH associated with
uniparental disomy. In addition, the genotyping data revealed several LCSH
associated with clinically relevant 'recessive type' genetic defects.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the utility of SNP genotyping data for
detection of clinically significant abnormalities, including chimerism/mosaicism 
and recessive Mendelian disorders associated with autozygosity. The incidence of 
clinically significant low level mosaicism inferred from these cases suggests
that this has hitherto been underestimated and chromosome mosaicism frequently
occurs in the absence of indicative clinical features. The growing appreciation
among clinicians and demand for SNP genotyping data poses significant challenges 
for the interpretation of LCSH, especially where there is no detailed phenotypic 
description to direct laboratory analysis. Finally, reporting of unexpected or
hidden consanguinity revealed by SNP array analysis raises potential ethical and 
legal issues.

PMID: 22039585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026049. Epub 2011 Oct 7.

Copy number variants in extended autism spectrum disorder families reveal
candidates potentially involved in autism risk.

Salyakina D(1), Cukier HN, Lee JM, Sacharow S, Nations LD, Ma D, Jaworski JM,
Konidari I, Whitehead PL, Wright HH, Abramson RK, Williams SM, Menon R, Haines
JL, Gilbert JR, Cuccaro ML, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

Copy number variations (CNVs) are a major cause of genetic disruption in the
human genome with far more nucleotides being altered by duplications and
deletions than by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In the multifaceted
etiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), CNVs appear to contribute
significantly to our understanding of the pathogenesis of this complex disease. A
unique resource of 42 extended ASD families was genotyped for over 1 million SNPs
to detect CNVs that may contribute to ASD susceptibility. Each family has at
least one avuncular or cousin pair with ASD. Families were then evaluated for
co-segregation of CNVs in ASD patients. We identified a total of five deletions
and seven duplications in eleven families that co-segregated with ASD. Two of the
CNVs overlap with regions on 7p21.3 and 15q24.1 that have been previously
reported in ASD individuals and two additional CNVs on 3p26.3 and 12q24.32 occur 
near regions associated with schizophrenia. These findings provide further
evidence for the involvement of ICA1 and NXPH1 on 7p21.3 in ASD susceptibility
and highlight novel ASD candidates, including CHL1, FGFBP3 and POUF41. These
studies highlight the power of using extended families for gene discovery in
traits with a complex etiology.

PMCID: PMC3189231
PMID: 22016809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Med Genet. 2011 Dec;48(12):810-8. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100294. Epub 2011
Oct 15.

Chromosome 1p21.3 microdeletions comprising DPYD and MIR137 are associated with
intellectual disability.

Willemsen MH(1), Valles A, Kirkels LA, Mastebroek M, Olde Loohuis N, Kos A,
Wissink-Lindhout WM, de Brouwer AP, Nillesen WM, Pfundt R, Holder-Espinasse M,
Vallee L, Andrieux J, Coppens-Hofman MC, Rensen H, Hamel BC, van Bokhoven H,
Aschrafi A, Kleefstra T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding gene transcripts involved in
post-transcriptional regulation of genes. Recent studies identified miRNAs as
important regulators of learning and memory in model organisms. So far, no
mutations in specific miRNA genes have been associated with impaired cognitive
functions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In three sibs and two unrelated patients with intellectual
disability (ID), overlapping 1p21.3 deletions were detected by genome-wide array 
analysis. The shortest region of overlap included dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
(DPYD) and microRNA 137 (MIR137). DPYD is involved in autosomal recessive
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Hemizygous DPYD deletions were
previously suggested to contribute to a phenotype with autism spectrum disorder
and speech delay. Interestingly, the mature microRNA transcript microRNA-137
(miR-137) was recently shown to be involved in modulating neurogenesis in adult
murine neuronal stem cells. Therefore, this study investigated the possible
involvement of MIR137 in the 1p21.3-deletion phenotype. The patients displayed a 
significantly decreased expression of both precursor and mature miR-137 levels,
as well as significantly increased expression of the validated downstream targets
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) and Enhancer of Zeste,
Drosophila, Homologue 2 (EZH2), and the newly identified target Kruppel-like
factor 4 (KLF4). The study also demonstrated significant enrichment of miR-137 at
the synapses of cortical and hippocampal neurons, suggesting a role of miR-137 in
regulating local synaptic protein synthesis machinery.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that dosage effects of MIR137 are associated with 
1p21.3 microdeletions and may therefore contribute to the ID phenotype in
patients with deletions harbouring this miRNA. A local effect at the synapse
might be responsible.

PMID: 22003227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;131(4):565-79. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1094-6. Epub 2011 Oct 
14.

A novel approach of homozygous haplotype sharing identifies candidate genes in
autism spectrum disorder.

Casey JP, Magalhaes T, Conroy JM, Regan R, Shah N, Anney R, Shields DC, Abrahams 
BS, Almeida J, Bacchelli E, Bailey AJ, Baird G, Battaglia A, Berney T, Bolshakova
N, Bolton PF, Bourgeron T, Brennan S, Cali P, Correia C, Corsello C, Coutanche M,
Dawson G, de Jonge M, Delorme R, Duketis E, Duque F, Estes A, Farrar P, Fernandez
BA, Folstein SE, Foley S, Fombonne E, Freitag CM, Gilbert J, Gillberg C, Glessner
JT, Green J, Guter SJ, Hakonarson H, Holt R, Hughes G, Hus V, Igliozzi R, Kim C, 
Klauck SM, Kolevzon A, Lamb JA, Leboyer M, Le Couteur A, Leventhal BL, Lord C,
Lund SC, Maestrini E, Mantoulan C, Marshall CR, McConachie H, McDougle CJ,
McGrath J, McMahon WM, Merikangas A, Miller J, Minopoli F, Mirza GK, Munson J,
Nelson SF, Nygren G, Oliveira G, Pagnamenta AT, Papanikolaou K, Parr JR, Parrini 
B, Pickles A, Pinto D, Piven J, Posey DJ, Poustka A, Poustka F, Ragoussis J, Roge
B, Rutter ML, Sequeira AF, Soorya L, Sousa I, Sykes N, Stoppioni V, Tancredi R,
Tauber M, Thompson AP, Thomson S, Tsiantis J, Van Engeland H, Vincent JB, Volkmar
F, Vorstman JA, Wallace S, Wang K, Wassink TH, White K, Wing K, Wittemeyer K,
Yaspan BL, Zwaigenbaum L, Betancur C, Buxbaum JD, Cantor RM, Cook EH, Coon H,
Cuccaro ML, Geschwind DH, Haines JL, Hallmayer J, Monaco AP, Nurnberger JI Jr,
Pericak-Vance MA, Schellenberg GD, Scherer SW, Sutcliffe JS, Szatmari P, Vieland 
VJ, Wijsman EM, Green A, Gill M, Gallagher L, Vicente A, Ennis S.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable disorder of complex and
heterogeneous aetiology. It is primarily characterized by altered cognitive
ability including impaired language and communication skills and fundamental
deficits in social reciprocity. Despite some notable successes in
neuropsychiatric genetics, overall, the high heritability of ASD (~90%) remains
poorly explained by common genetic risk variants. However, recent studies suggest
that rare genomic variation, in particular copy number variation, may account for
a significant proportion of the genetic basis of ASD. We present a large scale
analysis to identify candidate genes which may contain low-frequency recessive
variation contributing to ASD while taking into account the potential
contribution of population differences to the genetic heterogeneity of ASD. Our
strategy, homozygous haplotype (HH) mapping, aims to detect homozygous segments
of identical haplotype structure that are shared at a higher frequency amongst
ASD patients compared to parental controls. The analysis was performed on 1,402
Autism Genome Project trios genotyped for 1 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). We identified 25 known and 1,218 novel ASD candidate genes 
in the discovery analysis including CADM2, ABHD14A, CHRFAM7A, GRIK2, GRM3, EPHA3,
FGF10, KCND2, PDZK1, IMMP2L and FOXP2. Furthermore, 10 of the previously reported
ASD genes and 300 of the novel candidates identified in the discovery analysis
were replicated in an independent sample of 1,182 trios. Our results demonstrate 
that regions of HH are significantly enriched for previously reported ASD
candidate genes and the observed association is independent of gene size (odds
ratio 2.10). Our findings highlight the applicability of HH mapping in complex
disorders such as ASD and offer an alternative approach to the analysis of
genome-wide association data.

PMCID: PMC3303079
PMID: 21996756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2012;9:239-72. doi: 10.1007/7854_2011_155.

Quantitative and molecular genetics of ADHD.

Asherson P(1), Gurling H.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry,
Kings College London, London, UK, philip.asherson@kcl.ac.uk.

ADHD is a common and highly heritable disorder. Family, twin, and adoption
studies confirm a strong genetic influence in risk for ADHD and there has been a 
great deal of interest in identifying the genetic factors involved. Quantitative 
genetic studies find that genetic risk for ADHD is continuously distributed
throughout the population, that there are both shared and unique genetic
influences on inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity, and that ADHD shares
genetic risk factors with commonly co-occurring clinical syndromes and traits.
ADHD is found at all ages and the underlying genetic architecture is similar
across the lifespan. In terms of specific genetic findings, there is consistent
evidence of monoamine neurotransmitter involvement with the best evidence coming 
from genetic markers in or near the dopamine D4 and D5 receptor genes. Recent
genome-wide association studies have identified new association findings,
including genes involved in cell division, cell adhesion, neuronal migration, and
neuronal plasticity. However, as yet, none of these pass genome-wide levels of
significance. Finally, recent data confirm an important role for rare copy number
variants, including those that are found in schizophrenia and autism. Future work
should use genetic association data to determine the nature of the cognitive,
neuronal and cellular processes that mediate genetic risks on behaviour, and
identify environmental factors that interact with genetic risks for ADHD.

PMID: 21989848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct 7;89(4):551-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.011.

Assessment of 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome implicates MBD5 as a single causal
locus of intellectual disability, epilepsy, and autism spectrum disorder.

Talkowski ME(1), Mullegama SV, Rosenfeld JA, van Bon BW, Shen Y, Repnikova EA,
Gastier-Foster J, Thrush DL, Kathiresan S, Ruderfer DM, Chiang C, Hanscom C,
Ernst C, Lindgren AM, Morton CC, An Y, Astbury C, Brueton LA, Lichtenbelt KD,
Ades LC, Fichera M, Romano C, Innis JW, Williams CA, Bartholomew D, Van Allen MI,
Parikh A, Zhang L, Wu BL, Pyatt RE, Schwartz S, Shaffer LG, de Vries BB, Gusella 
JF, Elsea SH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2012 Apr;81(4):363-4.

Persons with neurodevelopmental disorders or autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often
harbor chromosomal microdeletions, yet the individual genetic contributors within
these regions have not been systematically evaluated. We established a consortium
of clinical diagnostic and research laboratories to accumulate a large cohort
with genetic alterations of chromosomal region 2q23.1 and acquired 65 subjects
with microdeletion or translocation. We sequenced translocation breakpoints;
aligned microdeletions to determine the critical region; assessed effects on mRNA
expression; and examined medical records, photos, and clinical evaluations. We
identified a single gene, methyl-CpG-binding domain 5 (MBD5), as the only locus
that defined the critical region. Partial or complete deletion of MBD5 was
associated with haploinsufficiency of mRNA expression, intellectual disability,
epilepsy, and autistic features. Fourteen alterations, including partial
deletions of noncoding regions not typically captured or considered pathogenic by
current diagnostic screening, disrupted MBD5 alone. Expression profiles and
clinical characteristics were largely indistinguishable between MBD5-specific
alteration and deletion of the entire 2q23.1 interval. No copy-number alterations
of MBD5 were observed in 7878 controls, suggesting MBD5 alterations are highly
penetrant. We surveyed MBD5 coding variations among 747 ASD subjects compared to 
2043 non-ASD subjects analyzed by whole-exome sequencing and detected an
association with a highly conserved methyl-CpG-binding domain missense variant,
p.79Gly>Glu (c.236G>A) (p = 0.012). These results suggest that genetic
alterations of MBD5 cause features of 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome and that this
epigenetic regulator significantly contributes to ASD risk, warranting further
consideration in research and clinical diagnostic screening and highlighting the 
importance of chromatin remodeling in the etiology of these complex disorders.

Copyright (c) 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3188839
PMID: 21981781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Appl Genet. 2011 Nov;52(4):443-9. doi: 10.1007/s13353-011-0063-z. Epub 2011 Sep
20.

Mental retardation and autism associated with recurrent 16p11.2 microdeletion:
incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity.

Ciuladaite Z(1), Kasnauskiene J, Cimbalistiene L, Preiksaitiene E, Patsalis PC,
Kucinskas V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Lithuania.
zivile.ciuladaite@mf.vu.lt

PMID: 21931978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Clin Genet. 2012 Feb;81(2):103-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01773.x. Epub
2011 Oct 5.

Recent genomic advances in schizophrenia.

Doherty JL(1), O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, and Neuroscience and
Mental Health Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

Recent studies have supported the hypothesis based upon expectations from
population genetics that the high heritability of schizophrenia reflects a
combination of relatively common alleles of small effect and rare alleles some
with relatively large effects. Genome-wide association studies have identified a 
number of risk loci at genome-wide levels of significance as well as evidence for
a substantial burden of common risk loci. Moreover these recent findings suggest 
genetic overlap with bipolar disorder which has traditionally been assumed to be 
genetically distinct from schizophrenia. Genome-wide studies of at least one
class of relatively uncommon variant, submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities
often referred to as copy number variations (CNVs), suggest that these confer
high risk of schizophrenia. There is evidence both for an increased burden of
large, rare CNVs in schizophrenia and that risk is conferred by a number of
specific large CNVs as well as by deletions of NRXN1 which encodes the synaptic
scaffolding protein neurexin 1. Many of these CNVs have been implicated in
autism, mental retardation, epilepsy and other neurodevelopment disorders. These 
findings have implications for pathogenesis and nosology of schizophrenia and
related disorders, and for future genetic studies.

(c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21895634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Nov 15;20(22):4360-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr363. Epub 2011 Aug
24.

Use of array CGH to detect exonic copy number variants throughout the genome in
autism families detects a novel deletion in TMLHE.

Celestino-Soper PB(1), Shaw CA, Sanders SJ, Li J, Murtha MT, Ercan-Sencicek AG,
Davis L, Thomson S, Gambin T, Chinault AC, Ou Z, German JR, Milosavljevic A,
Sutcliffe JS, Cook EH Jr, Stankiewicz P, State MW, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with increasing evidence of heterogeneous
genetic etiology including de novo and inherited copy number variants (CNVs). We 
performed array comparative genomic hybridization using a custom Agilent 1 M
oligonucleotide array intended to cover 197 332 unique exons in RefSeq genes; 98%
were covered by at least one probe and 95% were covered by three or more probes
with the focus on detecting relatively small CNVs that would implicate a single
protein-coding gene. The study group included 99 trios from the Simons Simplex
Collection. The analysis identified and validated 55 potentially pathogenic CNVs,
categorized as de novo autosomal heterozygous, inherited homozygous autosomal,
complex autosomal and hemizygous deletions on the X chromosome of probands.
Twenty percent (11 of 55) of these CNV calls were rare when compared with the
Database of Genomic Variants. Thirty-six percent (20 of 55) of the CNVs were also
detected in the same samples in an independent analysis using the 1 M Illumina
single-nucleotide polymorphism array. Findings of note included a common and
sometimes homozygous 61 bp exonic deletion in SLC38A10, three CNVs found in
lymphoblast-derived DNA but not present in whole-blood derived DNA and, most
importantly, in a male proband, an exonic deletion of the TMLHE (trimethyllysine 
hydroxylase epsilon) that encodes the first enzyme in the biosynthesis of
carnitine. Data for CNVs present in lymphoblasts but absent in fresh blood DNA
suggest that these represent clonal outgrowth of individual B cells with
pre-existing somatic mutations rather than artifacts arising in cell culture. GEO
accession number GSE23765 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/, date last accessed
on 30 August 2011). Genboree accession:
http://genboree.org/java-bin/gbrowser.jsp?refSeqId=1868&entryPointId=chr17&from=5
3496072&to=53694382&isPublic=yes, date last accessed on 30 August 2011.

PMCID: PMC3196886
PMID: 21865298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Annu Rev Genet. 2011;45:203-26. doi: 10.1146/annurev-genet-102209-163544. Epub
2011 Aug 19.

Human copy number variation and complex genetic disease.

Girirajan S(1), Campbell CD, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University 
of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. sangi@u.washington.edu

Copy number variants (CNVs) play an important role in human disease and
population diversity. Advancements in technology have allowed for the analysis of
CNVs in thousands of individuals with disease in addition to thousands of
controls. These studies have identified rare CNVs associated with
neuropsychiatric diseases such as autism, schizophrenia, and intellectual
disability. In addition, copy number polymorphisms (CNPs) are present at higher
frequencies in the population, show high diversity in copy number, sequence, and 
structure, and have been associated with multiple phenotypes, primarily related
to immune or environmental response. However, the landscape of copy number
variation still remains largely unexplored, especially for smaller CNVs and those
embedded within complex regions of the human genome. An integrated approach
including characterization of single nucleotide variants and CNVs in a large
number of individuals with disease and normal genomes holds the promise of
thoroughly elucidating the genetic basis of human disease and diversity.

PMID: 21854229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hum Mutat. 2011 Dec;32(12):1500-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.21581. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

Extending the scope of diagnostic chromosome analysis: detection of single gene
defects using high-resolution SNP microarrays.

Bruno DL(1), Stark Z, Amor DJ, Burgess T, Butler K, Corrie S, Francis D,
Ganesamoorthy D, Hills L, James PA, O'Rielly D, Oertel R, Savarirayan R,
Prabhakara K, Salce N, Slater HR.

Author information: 
(1)VCGS Cytogenetics Laboratory, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia.

Microarray analysis has provided significant advances in the diagnosis of
conditions resulting from submicroscopic chromosome abnormalities. It has been
recommended that array testing should be a "first tier" test in the evaluation of
individuals with intellectual disability, developmental delay, congenital
anomalies, and autism. The availability of arrays with increasingly high probe
coverage and resolution has increased the detection of decreasingly small copy
number changes (CNCs) down to the intragenic or even exon level. Importantly,
arrays that genotype SNPs also detect extended regions of homozygosity. We
describe 14 examples of single gene disorders caused by intragenic changes from a
consecutive set of 6,500 tests using high-resolution SNP microarrays. These cases
illustrate the increased scope of cytogenetic testing beyond dominant chromosome 
rearrangements that typically contain many genes. Nine of the cases confirmed the
clinical diagnosis, that is, followed a "phenotype to genotype" approach. Five
were diagnosed by the laboratory analysis in the absence of a specific clinical
diagnosis, that is, followed a "genotype to phenotype" approach. Two were
clinically significant, incidental findings. The importance of astute clinical
assessment and laboratory-clinician consultation is emphasized to optimize the
value of microarrays in the diagnosis of disorders caused by single gene copy
number and sequence mutations.

(c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21850686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genet Med. 2011 Sep;13(9):777-84. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e31822c79f9.

An evidence-based approach to establish the functional and clinical significance 
of copy number variants in intellectual and developmental disabilities.

Kaminsky EB(1), Kaul V, Paschall J, Church DM, Bunke B, Kunig D, Moreno-De-Luca
D, Moreno-De-Luca A, Mulle JG, Warren ST, Richard G, Compton JG, Fuller AE, Gliem
TJ, Huang S, Collinson MN, Beal SJ, Ackley T, Pickering DL, Golden DM, Aston E,
Whitby H, Shetty S, Rossi MR, Rudd MK, South ST, Brothman AR, Sanger WG, Iyer RK,
Crolla JA, Thorland EC, Aradhya S, Ledbetter DH, Martin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

PURPOSE: Copy number variants have emerged as a major cause of human disease such
as autism and intellectual disabilities. Because copy number variants are common 
in normal individuals, determining the functional and clinical significance of
rare copy number variants in patients remains challenging. The adoption of
whole-genome chromosomal microarray analysis as a first-tier diagnostic test for 
individuals with unexplained developmental disabilities provides a unique
opportunity to obtain large copy number variant datasets generated through
routine patient care.
METHODS: A consortium of diagnostic laboratories was established (the
International Standards for Cytogenomic Arrays consortium) to share copy number
variant and phenotypic data in a central, public database. We present the largest
copy number variant case-control study to date comprising 15,749 International
Standards for Cytogenomic Arrays cases and 10,118 published controls, focusing
our initial analysis on recurrent deletions and duplications involving 14 copy
number variant regions.
RESULTS: Compared with controls, 14 deletions and seven duplications were
significantly overrepresented in cases, providing a clinical diagnosis as
pathogenic.
CONCLUSION: Given the rapid expansion of clinical chromosomal microarray analysis
testing, very large datasets will be available to determine the functional
significance of increasingly rare copy number variants. This data will provide an
evidence-based guide to clinicians across many disciplines involved in the
diagnosis, management, and care of these patients and their families.

PMCID: PMC3661946
PMID: 21844811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Genet. 2011 Aug 14;43(9):838-46. doi: 10.1038/ng.909.

A copy number variation morbidity map of developmental delay.

Cooper GM(1), Coe BP, Girirajan S, Rosenfeld JA, Vu TH, Baker C, Williams C,
Stalker H, Hamid R, Hannig V, Abdel-Hamid H, Bader P, McCracken E, Niyazov D,
Leppig K, Thiese H, Hummel M, Alexander N, Gorski J, Kussmann J, Shashi V,
Johnson K, Rehder C, Ballif BC, Shaffer LG, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2014 Sep;46(9):1040.

To understand the genetic heterogeneity underlying developmental delay, we
compared copy number variants (CNVs) in 15,767 children with intellectual
disability and various congenital defects (cases) to CNVs in 8,329 unaffected
adult controls. We estimate that [?]14.2% of disease in these children is caused by
CNVs >400 kb. We observed a greater enrichment of CNVs in individuals with
craniofacial anomalies and cardiovascular defects compared to those with epilepsy
or autism. We identified 59 pathogenic CNVs, including 14 new or previously
weakly supported candidates, refined the critical interval for several genomic
disorders, such as the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome, and identified 940
candidate dosage-sensitive genes. We also developed methods to opportunistically 
discover small, disruptive CNVs within the large and growing diagnostic array
datasets. This evolving CNV morbidity map, combined with exome and genome
sequencing, will be critical for deciphering the genetic basis of developmental
delay, intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorders.

PMCID: PMC3171215
PMID: 21841781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Neurogenetics. 2011 Nov;12(4):315-23. doi: 10.1007/s10048-011-0297-2. Epub 2011
Aug 12.

Social Responsiveness Scale-aided analysis of the clinical impact of copy number 
variations in autism.

van Daalen E(1), Kemner C, Verbeek NE, van der Zwaag B, Dijkhuizen T, Rump P,
Houben R, van 't Slot R, de Jonge MV, Staal WG, Beemer FA, Vorstman JA, Burbach
JP, van Amstel HK, Hochstenbach R, Brilstra EH, Poot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University Medical Centre,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Recent array-based studies have detected a wealth of copy number variations
(CNVs) in patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Since CNVs also occur in
healthy individuals, their contributions to the patient's phenotype remain
largely unclear. In a cohort of children with symptoms of ASD, diagnosis of the
index patient using ADOS-G and ADI-R was performed, and the Social Responsiveness
Scale (SRS) was administered to the index patients, both parents, and all
available siblings. CNVs were identified using SNP arrays and confirmed by FISH
or array CGH. To evaluate the clinical significance of CNVs, we analyzed three
families with multiple affected children (multiplex) and six families with a
single affected child (simplex) in which at least one child carried a CNV with a 
brain-transcribed gene. CNVs containing genes that participate in pathways
previously implicated in ASD, such as the phosphoinositol signaling pathway
(PIK3CA, GIRDIN), contactin-based networks of cell communication (CNTN6), and
microcephalin (MCPH1) were found not to co-segregate with ASD phenotypes. In one 
family, a loss of CNTN5 co-segregated with disease. This indicates that most CNVs
may by themselves not be sufficient to cause ASD, but still may contribute to the
phenotype by additive or epistatic interactions with inherited (transmitted)
mutations or non-genetic factors. Our study extends the scope of genome-wide CNV 
profiling beyond de novo CNVs in sporadic patients and may aid in uncovering
missing heritability in genome-wide screening studies of complex psychiatric
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3215885
PMID: 21837366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Aug 10;3(95):95ra75. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002464.

Rare copy number variation discovery and cross-disorder comparisons identify risk
genes for ADHD.

Lionel AC(1), Crosbie J, Barbosa N, Goodale T, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Rickaby J,
Gazzellone M, Carson AR, Howe JL, Wang Z, Wei J, Stewart AF, Roberts R, McPherson
R, Fiebig A, Franke A, Schreiber S, Zwaigenbaum L, Fernandez BA, Roberts W,
Arnold PD, Szatmari P, Marshall CR, Schachar R, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology,
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common and persistent
condition characterized by developmentally atypical and impairing inattention,
hyperactivity, and impulsiveness. We identified de novo and rare copy number
variations (CNVs) in 248 unrelated ADHD patients using million-feature genotyping
arrays. We found de novo CNVs in 3 of 173 (1.7%) ADHD patients for whom we had
DNA from both parents. These CNVs affected brain-expressed genes: DCLK2, SORCS1, 
SORCS3, and MACROD2. We also detected rare inherited CNVs in 19 of 248 (7.7%)
ADHD probands, which were absent in 2357 controls and which either overlapped
previously implicated ADHD loci (for example, DRD5 and 15q13 microduplication) or
identified new candidate susceptibility genes (ASTN2, CPLX2, ZBBX, and PTPRN2).
Among these de novo and rare inherited CNVs, there were also examples of genes
(ASTN2, GABRG1, and CNTN5) previously implicated by rare CNVs in other
neurodevelopmental conditions including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). To
further explore the overlap of risks in ADHD and ASD, we used the same
microarrays to test for rare CNVs in an independent, newly collected cohort of
349 unrelated individuals with a primary diagnosis of ASD. Deletions of the
neuronal ASTN2 and the ASTN2-intronic TRIM32 genes yielded the strongest
association with ADHD and ASD, but numerous other shared candidate genes (such as
CHCHD3, MACROD2, and the 16p11.2 region) were also revealed. Our results provide 
support for a role for rare CNVs in ADHD risk and reinforce evidence for the
existence of common underlying susceptibility genes for ADHD, ASD, and other
neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMID: 21832240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Aug 8;6:54. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-54.

Understanding the impact of 1q21.1 copy number variant.

Harvard C(1), Strong E, Mercier E, Colnaghi R, Alcantara D, Chow E, Martell S,
Tyson C, Hrynchak M, McGillivray B, Hamilton S, Marles S, Mhanni A, Dawson AJ,
Pavlidis P, Qiao Y, Holden JJ, Lewis SM, O'Driscoll M, Rajcan-Separovic E.

Author information: 
(1)Child and Family Research Institute, Molecular Cytogenetics and Array
Laboratory, 950 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: 1q21.1 Copy Number Variant (CNV) is associated with a highly variable
phenotype ranging from congenital anomalies, learning deficits/intellectual
disability (ID), to a normal phenotype. Hence, the clinical significance of this 
CNV can be difficult to evaluate. Here we described the consequences of the
1q21.1 CNV on genome-wide gene expression and function of selected candidate
genes within 1q21.1 using cell lines from clinically well described subjects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eight subjects from 3 families were included in the study:
six with a 1q21.1 deletion and two with a 1q21.1 duplication. High resolution
Affymetrix 2.7M array was used to refine the 1q21.1 CNV breakpoints and exclude
the presence of secondary CNVs of pathogenic relevance. Whole genome expression
profiling, studied in lymphoblast cell lines (LBCs) from 5 subjects, showed
enrichment of genes from 1q21.1 in the top 100 genes ranked based on correlation 
of expression with 1q21.1 copy number. The function of two top genes from 1q21.1,
CHD1L/ALC1 and PRKAB2, was studied in detail in LBCs from a deletion and a
duplication carrier. CHD1L/ALC1 is an enzyme with a role in chromatin
modification and DNA damage response while PRKAB2 is a member of the AMP kinase
complex, which senses and maintains systemic and cellular energy balance. The
protein levels for CHD1L/ALC1 and PRKAB2 were changed in concordance with their
copy number in both LBCs. A defect in chromatin remodeling was documented based
on impaired decatenation (chromatid untangling) checkpoint (DCC) in both LBCs.
This defect, reproduced by CHD1L/ALC1 siRNA, identifies a new role of CHD1L/ALC1 
in DCC. Both LBCs also showed elevated levels of micronuclei following treatment 
with a Topoisomerase II inhibitor suggesting increased DNA breaks. AMP kinase
function, specifically in the deletion containing LBCs, was attenuated.
CONCLUSION: Our studies are unique as they show for the first time that the
1q21.1 CNV not only causes changes in the expression of its key integral genes,
associated with changes at the protein level, but also results in changes in
their known function, in the case of AMPK, and newly identified function such as 
DCC activation in the case of CHD1L/ALC1. Our results support the use of patient 
lymphoblasts for dissecting the functional sequelae of genes integral to CNVs in 
carrier cell lines, ultimately enhancing understanding of biological processes
which may contribute to the clinical phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3180300
PMID: 21824431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Dec;156B(7):808-16. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31225. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Genomic architecture of aggression: rare copy number variants in intermittent
explosive disorder.

Vu TH(1), Coccaro EF, Eichler EE, Girirajan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, USA. sangi@u.washington.edu

Copy number variants (CNVs) are known to be associated with complex
neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g., schizophrenia and autism) but have not been
explored in the isolated features of aggressive behaviors such as intermittent
explosive disorder (IED). IED is characterized by recurrent episodes of
aggression in which individuals act impulsively and grossly out of proportion
from the involved stressors. Previous studies have identified genetic variants in
the serotonergic pathway that play a role in susceptibility to this behavior, but
additional contributors have not been identified. Therefore, to further delineate
possible genetic influences, we investigated CNVs in individuals diagnosed with
IED and/or personality disorder (PD). We carried out array comparative genomic
hybridization on 113 samples of individuals with isolated features of IED
(n = 90) or PD (n = 23). We detected a recurrent 1.35-Mbp deletion on chromosome 
1q21.1 in one IED subject and a novel [?]350-kbp deletion on chromosome
16q22.3q23.1 in another IED subject. While five recent reports have suggested the
involvement of an [?]1.6-Mbp 15q13.3 deletion in individuals with behavioral
problems, particularly aggression, we report an absence of such events in our
study of individuals specifically selected for aggression. We did, however,
detect a smaller [?]430-kbp 15q13.3 duplication containing CHRNA7 in one individual
with PD. While these results suggest a possible role for rare CNVs in identifying
genes underlying IED or PD, further studies on a large number of
well-characterized individuals are necessary.

Copyright (c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3168586
PMID: 21812102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genet Med. 2011 Oct;13(10):868-80. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182217a06.

Copy number variants of schizophrenia susceptibility loci are associated with a
spectrum of speech and developmental delays and behavior problems.

Sahoo T(1), Theisen A, Rosenfeld JA, Lamb AN, Ravnan JB, Schultz RA, Torchia BS, 
Neill N, Casci I, Bejjani BA, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, 2820 N. Astor St., Spokane, WA 99207, USA.
shaffer@signaturegenomics.com

PURPOSE: : Recently, molecular cytogenetic techniques have identified novel copy 
number variants in individuals with schizophrenia. However, no large-scale
prospective studies have been performed to characterize the broader spectrum of
phenotypes associated with such copy number variants in individuals with
unexplained physical and intellectual disabilities encountered in a diagnostic
setting.
METHODS: : We analyzed 38,779 individuals referred to our diagnostic laboratory
for microarray testing for the presence of copy number variants encompassing 20
putative schizophrenia susceptibility loci. We also analyzed the indications for 
study for individuals with copy number variants overlapping those found in six
individuals referred for schizophrenia.
RESULTS: : After excluding larger gains or losses that encompassed additional
genes outside the candidate loci (e.g., whole-arm gains/losses), we identified
1113 individuals with copy number variants encompassing schizophrenia
susceptibility loci and 37 individuals with copy number variants overlapping
those present in the six individuals referred to our laboratory for
schizophrenia. Of these, 1035 had a copy number variant of one of six recurrent
loci: 1q21.1, 15q11.2, 15q13.3, 16p11.2, 16p13.11, and 22q11.2. The indications
for study for these 1150 individuals were diverse and included developmental
delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum, and multiple congenital
anomalies.
CONCLUSION: : The results from our study, the largest genotype-first analysis of 
schizophrenia susceptibility loci to date, suggest that the phenotypic effects of
copy number variants associated with schizophrenia are pleiotropic and imply the 
existence of shared biologic pathways among multiple neurodevelopmental
conditions.

PMID: 21792059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2011 Jun;11(5):521-32. doi: 10.1586/ERM.11.32.

Oligonucleotide microarrays in constitutional genetic diagnosis.

Keren B(1), Le Caignec C.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe Hospitalier Pitie-Salpetriere, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris,
Departement de Genetique et Cytogenetique, France.

Oligonucleotide microarrays such as comparative genomic hybridization arrays and 
SNP microarrays enable the identification of genomic imbalances - also termed
copy-number variants - with increasing resolution. This article will focus on the
most significant applications of high-throughput oligonucleotide microarrays,
both in genetic diagnosis and research. In genetic diagnosis, the method is
becoming a standard tool for investigating patients with unexplained
developmental delay/intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders and/or
with multiple congenital anomalies. Oligonucleotide microarray have also been
recently applied to the detection of genomic imbalances in prenatal diagnosis
either to characterize a chromosomal rearrangement that has previously been
identified by standard prenatal karyotyping or to detect a cryptic genomic
imbalance in a fetus with ultrasound abnormalities and a normal standard prenatal
karyotype. In research, oligonucleotide microarrays have been used for a wide
range of applications, such as the identification of new genes responsible for
monogenic disorders and the association of a copy-number variant as a
predisposing factor to a common disease. Despite its widespread use, the
interpretation of results is not always straightforward. We will discuss several 
unexpected results and ethical issues raised by these new methods.

PMID: 21707460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Hum Genet. 2011 Jul;130(1):123-48. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1037-2. Epub 2011 Jun 
24.

Risk factors for autism: translating genomic discoveries into diagnostics.

Scherer SW(1), Dawson G.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin Centre and The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada. stephen.scherer@sickkids.ca

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of conditions characterized by
impairments in communication and reciprocal social interaction, and the presence 
of restricted and repetitive behaviors. The spectrum of autistic features is
variable, with severity of symptoms ranging from mild to severe, sometimes with
poor clinical outcomes. Twin and family studies indicate a strong genetic basis
for ASD susceptibility. Recent progress in defining rare highly penetrant
mutations and copy number variations as ASD risk factors has prompted early
uptake of these research findings into clinical diagnostics, with microarrays
becoming a 'standard of care' test for any ASD diagnostic work-up. The
ever-changing landscape of the generation of genomic data coupled with the vast
heterogeneity in cause and expression of ASDs (further influenced by issues of
penetrance, variable expressivity, multigenic inheritance and ascertainment)
creates complexity that demands careful consideration of how to apply this
knowledge. Here, we discuss the scientific, ethical, policy and communication
aspects of translating the new discoveries into clinical and diagnostic tools for
promoting the well-being of individuals and families with ASDs.

PMID: 21701786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec;19(12):1238-45. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.121. Epub 2011
Jun 22.

Copy number variants and infantile spasms: evidence for abnormalities in ventral 
forebrain development and pathways of synaptic function.

Paciorkowski AR(1), Thio LL, Rosenfeld JA, Gajecka M, Gurnett CA, Kulkarni S,
Chung WK, Marsh ED, Gentile M, Reggin JD, Wheless JW, Balasubramanian S, Kumar R,
Christian SL, Marini C, Guerrini R, Maltsev N, Shaffer LG, Dobyns WB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Washington University, St Louis, MO, 
USA. arpac@u.washington.edu

Infantile spasms (ISS) are an epilepsy disorder frequently associated with severe
developmental outcome and have diverse genetic etiologies. We ascertained 11
subjects with ISS and novel copy number variants (CNVs) and combined these with a
new cohort with deletion 1p36 and ISS, and additional published patients with ISS
and other chromosomal abnormalities. Using bioinformatics tools, we analyzed the 
gene content of these CNVs for enrichment in pathways of pathogenesis. Several
important findings emerged. First, the gene content was enriched for the gene
regulatory network involved in ventral forebrain development. Second, genes in
pathways of synaptic function were overrepresented, significantly those involved 
in synaptic vesicle transport. Evidence also suggested roles for GABAergic
synapses and the postsynaptic density. Third, we confirm the association of ISS
with duplication of 14q12 and maternally inherited duplication of 15q11q13, and
report the association with duplication of 21q21. We also present a patient with 
ISS and deletion 7q11.3 not involving MAGI2. Finally, we provide evidence that
ISS in deletion 1p36 may be associated with deletion of KLHL17 and expand the
epilepsy phenotype in that syndrome to include early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy. Several of the identified pathways share functional links, and
abnormalities of forebrain synaptic growth and function may form a common
biologic mechanism underlying both ISS and autism. This study demonstrates a
novel approach to the study of gene content in subjects with ISS and copy number 
variation, and contributes further evidence to support specific pathways of
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3230360
PMID: 21694734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 Sep-Oct;54(5):e516-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2011.05.008.
Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Phenotypic spectrum associated with duplication of Xp11.22-p11.23 includes Autism
Spectrum Disorder.

Chung BH(1), Drmic I, Marshall CR, Grafodatskaya D, Carter M, Fernandez BA,
Weksberg R, Roberts W, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Dup(X)(p11.22-p11.23) has been shown to be associated with intellectual
disability (ID, also referred to as mental retardation). Here, we characterize a 
4.64 Mb de novo duplication of the same Xp11.22-p11.23 ID region in a female, but
for this reference case the diagnosis was Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Besides
ASD, she also had very persistent trichotillomania, anxiety symptoms and some
non-specific dysmorphic features. We report the detailed clinical features, as
well as refine the rearrangement breakpoints of this disease-associated copy
number variation region, which encompasses more than 50 genes. We propose that in
addition to ID, the phenotypic spectrum associated with dup(X)(p11.22-p11.23) can
include ASD, language impairment, and/or other primary psychiatric disorders.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21689796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genet Med. 2011 Jul;13(7):680-5. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182217a3a.

American College of Medical Genetics standards and guidelines for interpretation 
and reporting of postnatal constitutional copy number variants.

Kearney HM(1), Thorland EC, Brown KK, Quintero-Rivera F, South ST; Working Group 
of the American College of Medical Genetics Laboratory Quality Assurance
Committee.

Author information: 
(1)Fullerton Genetics Center, Mission Health System, 267 McDowell St., Asheville,
NC 28803, USA. Hutton.kearney@msj.org

Genomic microarrays used to assess DNA copy number are now recommended as
first-tier tests for the postnatal evaluation of individuals with intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorders, and/or multiple congenital anomalies.
Application of this technology has resulted in the discovery of widespread copy
number variation in the human genome, both polymorphic variation in healthy
individuals and novel pathogenic copy number imbalances. To assist clinical
laboratories in the evaluation of copy number variants and to promote consistency
in interpretation and reporting of genomic microarray results, the American
College of Medical Genetics has developed the following professional guidelines
for the interpretation and reporting of copy number variation. These guidelines
apply primarily to evaluation of constitutional copy number variants detected in 
the postnatal setting.

PMID: 21681106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):898-907. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.021.

Rare de novo variants associated with autism implicate a large functional network
of genes involved in formation and function of synapses.

Gilman SR(1), Iossifov I, Levy D, Ronemus M, Wigler M, Vitkup D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics and Department of
Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, 1130 St. Nicolas Ave, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):806-8.
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011 Aug;12(8):429.

Identification of complex molecular networks underlying common human phenotypes
is a major challenge of modern genetics. In this study, we develop a method for
network-based analysis of genetic associations (NETBAG). We use NETBAG to
identify a large biological network of genes affected by rare de novo CNVs in
autism. The genes forming the network are primarily related to synapse
development, axon targeting, and neuron motility. The identified network is
strongly related to genes previously implicated in autism and intellectual
disability phenotypes. Our results are also consistent with the hypothesis that
significantly stronger functional perturbations are required to trigger the
autistic phenotype in females compared to males. Overall, the presented analysis 
of de novo variants supports the hypothesis that perturbed synaptogenesis is at
the heart of autism. More generally, our study provides proof of the principle
that networks underlying complex human phenotypes can be identified by a
network-based functional analysis of rare genetic variants.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3607702
PMID: 21658583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):886-97. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.015.

Rare de novo and transmitted copy-number variation in autistic spectrum
disorders.

Levy D(1), Ronemus M, Yamrom B, Lee YH, Leotta A, Kendall J, Marks S, Lakshmi B, 
Pai D, Ye K, Buja A, Krieger A, Yoon S, Troge J, Rodgers L, Iossifov I, Wigler M.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011 Aug;12(8):429.
    Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):806-8.

To explore the genetic contribution to autistic spectrum disorders (ASDs), we
have studied genomic copy-number variation in a large cohort of families with a
single affected child and at least one unaffected sibling. We confirm a major
contribution from de novo deletions and duplications but also find evidence of a 
role for inherited "ultrarare" duplications. Our results show that, relative to
males, females have greater resistance to autism from genetic causes, which
raises the question of the fate of female carriers. By analysis of the proportion
and number of recurrent loci, we set a lower bound for distinct target loci at
several hundred. We find many new candidate regions, adding substantially to the 
list of potential gene targets, and confirm several loci previously observed. The
functions of the genes in the regions of de novo variation point to a great
diversity of genetic causes but also suggest functional convergence.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21658582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):863-85. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.002.

Multiple recurrent de novo CNVs, including duplications of the 7q11.23 Williams
syndrome region, are strongly associated with autism.

Sanders SJ(1), Ercan-Sencicek AG, Hus V, Luo R, Murtha MT, Moreno-De-Luca D, Chu 
SH, Moreau MP, Gupta AR, Thomson SA, Mason CE, Bilguvar K, Celestino-Soper PB,
Choi M, Crawford EL, Davis L, Wright NR, Dhodapkar RM, DiCola M, DiLullo NM,
Fernandez TV, Fielding-Singh V, Fishman DO, Frahm S, Garagaloyan R, Goh GS,
Kammela S, Klei L, Lowe JK, Lund SC, McGrew AD, Meyer KA, Moffat WJ, Murdoch JD, 
O'Roak BJ, Ober GT, Pottenger RS, Raubeson MJ, Song Y, Wang Q, Yaspan BL, Yu TW, 
Yurkiewicz IR, Beaudet AL, Cantor RM, Curland M, Grice DE, Gunel M, Lifton RP,
Mane SM, Martin DM, Shaw CA, Sheldon M, Tischfield JA, Walsh CA, Morrow EM,
Ledbetter DH, Fombonne E, Lord C, Martin CL, Brooks AI, Sutcliffe JS, Cook EH Jr,
Geschwind D, Roeder K, Devlin B, State MW.

Author information: 
(1)Program on Neurogenetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 230 South
Frontage Road, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011 Aug;12(8):429.
    Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):806-8.

We have undertaken a genome-wide analysis of rare copy-number variation (CNV) in 
1124 autism spectrum disorder (ASD) families, each comprised of a single proband,
unaffected parents, and, in most kindreds, an unaffected sibling. We find
significant association of ASD with de novo duplications of 7q11.23, where the
reciprocal deletion causes Williams-Beuren syndrome, characterized by a highly
social personality. We identify rare recurrent de novo CNVs at five additional
regions, including 16p13.2 (encompassing genes USP7 and C16orf72) and Cadherin
13, and implement a rigorous approach to evaluating the statistical significance 
of these observations. Overall, large de novo CNVs, particularly those
encompassing multiple genes, confer substantial risks (OR = 5.6; CI = 2.6-12.0, p
= 2.4 x 10(-7)). We estimate there are 130-234 ASD-related CNV regions in the
human genome and present compelling evidence, based on cumulative data, for
association of rare de novo events at 7q11.23, 15q11.2-13.1, 16p11.2, and
Neurexin 1.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3939065
PMID: 21658581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Curr Genomics. 2010 Dec;11(8):607-17. doi: 10.2174/138920210793360952.

Retinoic Acid Induced 1, RAI1: A Dosage Sensitive Gene Related to Neurobehavioral
Alterations Including Autistic Behavior.

Carmona-Mora P(1), Walz K.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Dr. John T. Macdonald
Foundation, Department of Human Genetics, Miller School of Medicine, University
of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.

Genomic structural changes, such as gene Copy Number Variations (CNVs) are
extremely abundant in the human genome. An enormous effort is currently ongoing
to recognize and catalogue human CNVs and their associations with abnormal
phenotypic outcomes. Recently, several reports related neuropsychiatric diseases 
(i.e. autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, mental retardation, behavioral
problems, epilepsy) with specific CNV. Moreover, for some conditions, both the
deletion and duplication of the same genomic segment are related to the
phenotype. Syndromes associated with CNVs (microdeletion and microduplication)
have long been known to display specific neurobehavioral traits. It is important 
to note that not every gene is susceptible to gene dosage changes and there are
only a few dosage sensitive genes. Smith-Magenis (SMS) and Potocki-Lupski (PTLS) 
syndromes are associated with a reciprocal microdeletion and microduplication
within chromosome 17p11.2. in humans. The dosage sensitive gene responsible for
most phenotypes in SMS has been identified: the Retinoic Acid Induced 1 (RAI1).
Studies on mouse models and humans suggest that RAI1 is likely the dosage
sensitive gene responsible for clinical features in PTLS. In addition, the human 
RAI1 gene has been implicated in several neurobehavioral traits as
spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA2), schizophrenia and non syndromic autism. In this
review we discuss the evidence of RAI1 as a dosage sensitive gene, its
relationship with different neurobehavioral traits, gene structure and mutations,
and what is known about its molecular and cellular function, as a first step in
the elucidation of the mechanisms that relate dosage sensitive genes with
abnormal neurobehavioral outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3078685
PMID: 21629438  [PubMed]


39. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jul;155A(7):1568-73. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34028. Epub 2011 
May 27.

Submicroscopic deletion in 7q31 encompassing CADPS2 and TSPAN12 in a child with
autism spectrum disorder and PHPV.

Okamoto N(1), Hatsukawa Y, Shimojima K, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center, Research Institute for
Maternal and Child Health, Japan. okamoto@osaka.email.ne.jp

We performed array comparative genomic hybridization utilizing a whole genome
oligonucleotide microarray in a patient with the autism spectrum disorders (ASDs)
and persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV). Submicroscopic deletions in 
7q31 encompassing CADPS2 (Ca(2+) -dependent activator protein for secretion 2)
and TSPAN12 (one of the members of the tetraspanin superfamily) were confirmed.
The CADPS2 plays important roles in the release of neurotrophin-3 and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Mutations in TSPAN12 are a relatively frequent
cause of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. We speculate that
haploinsufficiency of CADPS2 and TSPAN12 contributes to ASDs and PHPV,
respectively.

Copyright (c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21626674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Epigenetics. 2011 Jul;6(7):862-9. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

A genomic point-of-view on environmental factors influencing the human brain
methylome.

LaSalle JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, UC Davis School of Medicine, University
of California, Davis, CA, USA. jmlasalle@ucdavis.edu

The etiologic paradigm of complex human disorders such as autism is that genetic 
and environmental risk factors are independent and additive, but the interactive 
effects at the epigenetic interface are largely ignored. Genomic technologies
have radically changed perspective on the human genome and how the epigenetic
interface may impact complex human disorders. Here, I review recent genomic,
environmental, and epigenetic findings that suggest a new paradigm of
"integrative genomics" in which genetic variation in genomic size may be impacted
by dietary and environmental factors that influence the genomic saturation of DNA
methylation. Human genomes are highly repetitive, but the interface of
large-scale genomic differences with environmental factors that alter the DNA
methylome such as dietary folate is under-explored. In addition to obvious direct
effects of some environmental toxins on the genome by causing chromosomal breaks,
non-mutagenic toxin exposures correlate with DNA hypomethylation that can lead to
rearrangements between repeats or increased retrotransposition. Since human
neurodevelopment appears to be particularly sensitive to alterations in
epigenetic pathways, a further focus will be on how developing neurons may be
particularly impacted by even subtle alterations to DNA methylation and proposing
new directions towards understanding the quixotic etiology of autism by
integrative genomic approaches.

PMCID: PMC3154427
PMID: 21617367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2011 May 4;6(5):e18612. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018612.

Identifying human disease genes through cross-species gene mapping of
evolutionary conserved processes.

Poot M(1), Badea A, Williams RW, Kas MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Understanding complex networks that modulate development in humans is
hampered by genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity within and between populations. 
Here we present a method that exploits natural variation in highly diverse mouse 
genetic reference panels in which genetic and environmental factors can be
tightly controlled. The aim of our study is to test a cross-species genetic
mapping strategy, which compares data of gene mapping in human patients with
functional data obtained by QTL mapping in recombinant inbred mouse strains in
order to prioritize human disease candidate genes.
METHODOLOGY: We exploit evolutionary conservation of developmental phenotypes to 
discover gene variants that influence brain development in humans. We studied
corpus callosum volume in a recombinant inbred mouse panel (C57BL/6JxDBA/2J, BXD 
strains) using high-field strength MRI technology. We aligned mouse mapping
results for this neuro-anatomical phenotype with genetic data from patients with 
abnormal corpus callosum (ACC) development.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: From the 61 syndromes which involve an ACC, 51 human
candidate genes have been identified. Through interval mapping, we identified a
single significant QTL on mouse chromosome 7 for corpus callosum volume with a
QTL peak located between 25.5 and 26.7 Mb. Comparing the genes in this mouse QTL 
region with those associated with human syndromes (involving ACC) and those
covered by copy number variations (CNV) yielded a single overlap, namely HNRPU in
humans and Hnrpul1 in mice. Further analysis of corpus callosum volume in BXD
strains revealed that the corpus callosum was significantly larger in BXD mice
with a B genotype at the Hnrpul1 locus than in BXD mice with a D genotype at
Hnrpul1 (F = 22.48, p<9.87*10(-5)).
CONCLUSION: This approach that exploits highly diverse mouse strains provides an 
efficient and effective translational bridge to study the etiology of human
developmental disorders, such as autism and schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3087714
PMID: 21572526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Hum Mutat. 2011 Aug;32(8):947-55. doi: 10.1002/humu.21524. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

Characterization of copy number-stable regions in the human genome.

Johansson AC(1), Feuk L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.

In the past few years the number of copy number variants (CNVs) identified in the
human genome has increased significantly, but our understanding of the functional
impact of CNVs is still limited. Clinically significant variations cannot easily 
be distinguished from benign, complicating interpretation of patient data.
Multiple studies have focused on analysis of regions that vary in copy number in 
specific disorders. Here we use the opposite strategy and focus our analysis on
regions that never seem to vary in the general population, hypothesizing that
these are copy number stable because variations within them are deleterious. Our 
results show that copy number stable regions are characterized by correlation
with a number of genomic features, allowing us to define a list of genomic
regions that are dosage sensitive in humans. We find that these dosage-sensitive 
regions show significant overlap with de novo CNVs identified in patients with
intellectual disability or autism. There is also a significant association
between copy number stable regions and rare inherited variants in autism
patients, but not in controls. Based on this predictive power, we propose that
copy number stable regions can be used to complement maps of known CNVs to
facilitate interpretation of patient data.

(c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21542059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Child Neurol. 2011 May;26(5):570-3. doi: 10.1177/0883073810387138.

Analysis of MECP2 gene copy number in boys with autism.

Xi CY(1), Lu Y, Tan YH, Hua TY, Zhao YJ, Liu XM, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China. xichy2006@yahoo.com.cn

Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic basis.The
methyl-CpG binding protein 2 gene (MECP2) is a dosage-sensitive gene in brain
development and has been implicated as a candidate gene for autism. Duplication
of the MECP2 gene has been reported in a few boys with autistic features. To
further investigate the association of MECP2 duplication with autism, the authors
performed real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect copy
number variations of the MECP2 gene in 82 autistic boys. No copy number variation
was found in these patients, indicating that duplication of the MECP2 gene is not
frequent in autistic patients. The authors consider that duplication of the MECP2
gene has no major effect on the susceptibility to autism. Replication of studies 
in a large-sized sample and a well-characterized subgroup of autism are warranted
to further identify the association of MECP2 gene duplication with autism.

PMID: 21531908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Jun;156B(4):493-501. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31188. Epub 2011 Apr 7.

Microduplications in an autism multiplex family narrow the region of
susceptibility for developmental disorders on 15q24 and implicate 7p21.

Cukier HN(1), Salyakina D, Blankstein SF, Robinson JL, Sacharow S, Ma D, Wright
HH, Abramson RK, Menon R, Williams SM, Haines JL, Cuccaro ML, Gilbert JR,
Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Florida, USA.

Copy number variations (CNVs) play a crucial role in the intricate genetics of
autism spectrum disorders. A region on chromosome 15q24 vulnerable to both
deletions and duplications has been previously implicated in a range of
phenotypes including autism, Asperger's syndrome, delayed development, and mild
to severe mental retardation. Prior studies have delineated a minimal critical
region of approximately 1.33 Mb. In this study, a multiplex autism family was
evaluated for CNVs using genotyping data from the Illumina 1 M BeadChip and
analyzed with the PennCNV algorithm. Variants were then identified that
co-segregate with autism features in this family. Here, we report autistic first 
cousins who carry two microduplications concordant with disease. Both
duplications were inherited maternally and found to be identical by descent. The 
first is an approximately 10,000 base pair microduplication within the minimal
region on 15q24 that falls across a single gene, ubiquitin-like 7. This is the
smallest duplication in the region to result in a neuropsychiatric disorder,
potentially narrowing the critical region for susceptibility to developmental and
autism spectrum disorders. The second is a novel, 352 kb tandem duplication on
7p21 that replicates part of the neurexophilin 1 and islet cell autoantigen 1
genes. The breakpoint junction falls within the intronic regions of these genes
and demonstrates a microhomology of four base pairs. Each of these
microduplications may contribute to the complex etiology of autism spectrum
disorders.

Copyright (c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21480499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Apr 8;88(4):469-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.03.013.

Next-generation sequencing strategies enable routine detection of balanced
chromosome rearrangements for clinical diagnostics and genetic research.

Talkowski ME(1), Ernst C, Heilbut A, Chiang C, Hanscom C, Lindgren A, Kirby A,
Liu S, Muddukrishna B, Ohsumi TK, Shen Y, Borowsky M, Daly MJ, Morton CC, Gusella
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.

The contribution of balanced chromosomal rearrangements to complex disorders
remains unclear because they are not detected routinely by genome-wide
microarrays and clinical localization is imprecise. Failure to consider these
events bypasses a potentially powerful complement to single nucleotide
polymorphism and copy-number association approaches to complex disorders, where
much of the heritability remains unexplained. To capitalize on this genetic
resource, we have applied optimized sequencing and analysis strategies to test
whether these potentially high-impact variants can be mapped at reasonable cost
and throughput. By using a whole-genome multiplexing strategy, rearrangement
breakpoints could be delineated at a fraction of the cost of standard sequencing.
For rearrangements already mapped regionally by karyotyping and fluorescence in
situ hybridization, a targeted approach enabled capture and sequencing of
multiple breakpoints simultaneously. Importantly, this strategy permitted capture
and unique alignment of up to 97% of repeat-masked sequences in the targeted
regions. Genome-wide analyses estimate that only 3.7% of bases should be
routinely omitted from genomic DNA capture experiments. Illustrating the power of
these approaches, the rearrangement breakpoints were rapidly defined to base pair
resolution and revealed unexpected sequence complexity, such as co-occurrence of 
inversion and translocation as an underlying feature of karyotypically balanced
alterations. These findings have implications ranging from genome annotation to
de novo assemblies and could enable sequencing screens for structural variations 
at a cost comparable to that of microarrays in standard clinical practice.

Copyright (c) 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3071919
PMID: 21473983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nervenarzt. 2011 May;82(5):553-62. doi: 10.1007/s00115-010-3241-z.

[Genetics and animal modeling of autism spectrum disorders. New developments].

[Article in German]

Klauck SM(1), Poustka L, Chiocchetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Genomanalyse, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120, Heidelberg. s.klauck@dkfz.de

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are pervasive developmental disorders with a
complex phenotype in respect to communication, verbal development, and social
behavior. Manifold molecular genetic analyses point towards a multifactorial
genetic predisposition. For the identification of central key mechanisms large
consortia have performed linkage analysis, genome-wide association, and copy
number variation (CNV) studies, which led to the characterization of risk factors
for ASD like CNV and single nucleotide polymorphisms but also single rare
mutations. The so far associated genomic regions and candidate genes impact
neuronal development especially the establishment of the synaptic cleft,
secretion of surface proteins, or dendritic translation. These findings point
towards deficits of translation-dependent cell-cell connectivity and synaptic
plasticity for ASD. Animal models are relevant to analyze the pathomechanisms of 
single genetic risk variants at the cellular, tissue-specific, and behavioral
levels.

PMID: 21472451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother. 2011 Mar;39(2):101-11. doi:
10.1024/1422-4917/a000096.

[Genetic analyses for identifying molecular mechanisms in autism spectrum
disorders].

[Article in German]

Chiocchetti A(1), Klauck SM.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Genomanalyse, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are severe neurodevelopmental disorders with
marked deficits in social communication, verbal development, and behaviour. The
broad phenotype and the clinical heterogeneity point to a polygenic disorder -
despite high heritability among siblings. According to recent findings not only
do single-rare mutations but also copy number variations and single nucleotide
polymorphisms impact the ASD phenotype. Because of the scope of national and
international consortia, many linkage and genome-wide association studies have
evolved which elucidate candidate and susceptibility genomic regions and genes
relevant for ASD. In contrast to polygenic or genetic complex models for autism, 
a few monogenetic forms of ASD are known to be caused by single gene defects,
e.g., fragile-X syndrome. Knock-out animal models of monogenetic autism (e.g.
FMRP(-/-)) or neurodegenerative disorders (e.g. MeCP2(-/-)) are often used to
analyze the molecular mechanisms underlying ASD. In this review we describe the
state of the art of genome analyses in ASD, the most widely used mouse models for
polygenic or monogenetic forms of autism and discuss new insights gained from
these analyses. The susceptibility genes so far identified seem to be involved in
the proper establishment of the synaptic cleft, the secretion of surface
proteins, or the overall cellular translation processes. Theses findings suggest 
that impacting translation-dependent processes like synaptic plasticity or
cell-to-cell connectivity may lead to an ASD phenotype.

PMID: 21442598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Mar 26;12:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-45.

Human PTCHD3 nulls: rare copy number and sequence variants suggest a
non-essential gene.

Ghahramani Seno MM(1), Kwan BY, Lee-Ng KK, Moessner R, Lionel AC, Marshall CR,
Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology,
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Copy number variations (CNVs) can contribute to variable degrees of
fitness and/or disease predisposition. Recent studies show that at least 1% of
any given genome is copy number variable when compared to the human reference
sequence assembly. Homozygous deletions (or CNV nulls) that are found in the
normal population are of particular interest because they may serve to define
non-essential genes in human biology.
RESULTS: In a genomic screen investigating CNV in Autism Spectrum Disorders
(ASDs) we detected a heterozygous deletion on chromosome 10p12.1, spanning the
Patched-domain containing 3 (PTCHD3) gene, at a frequency of ~1.4% (6/427). This 
finding seemed interesting, given recent discoveries on the role of another
Patched-domain containing gene (PTCHD1) in ASD. Screening of another 177 ASD
probands yielded two additional heterozygous deletions bringing the frequency to 
1.3% (8/604). The deletion was found at a frequency of ~0.73% (27/3,695) in
combined control population from North America and Northern Europe predominately 
of European ancestry. Screening of the human genome diversity panel (HGDP-CEPH)
covering worldwide populations yielded deletions in 7/1,043 unrelated individuals
and those detected were confined to individuals of European/Mediterranean/Middle 
Eastern ancestry. Breakpoint mapping yielded an identical 102,624 bp deletion in 
all cases and controls tested, suggesting a common ancestral event.
Interestingly, this CNV occurs at a break of synteny between humans and mouse.
Considering all data, however, no significant association of these rare PTCHD3
deletions with ASD was observed. Notwithstanding, our RNA expression studies
detected PTCHD3 in several tissues, and a novel shorter isoform for PTCHD3 was
characterized. Expression in transfected COS-7 cells showed PTCHD3 isoforms
colocalize with calnexin in the endoplasmic reticulum. The presence of a patched 
(Ptc) domain suggested a role for PTCHD3 in various biological processes mediated
through the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. However, further investigation
yielded one individual harboring a homozygous deletion (PTCHD3 null) without ASD 
or any other overt abnormal phenotype. Exon sequencing of PTCHD3 in other
individuals with deletions revealed compound point mutations also resulting in a 
null state.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggests that PTCHD3 may be a non-essential gene in some
humans and characterization of this novel CNV at 10p12.1 will facilitate
population and disease studies.

PMCID: PMC3072306
PMID: 21439084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biomed Inform. 2011 Dec;44 Suppl 1:S5-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.03.003. Epub 
2011 Mar 21.

Autism candidate genes via mouse phenomics.

Meehan TF(1), Carr CJ, Jay JJ, Bult CJ, Chesler EJ, Blake JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main St., Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.
tmeehan@informatics.jax.org

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) represent a group of developmental disabilities
with a strong genetic basis. The laboratory mouse is increasingly used as a model
organism for ASD, and MGI, the Mouse Genome Informatics resource, is the primary 
model organism database for the laboratory mouse. MGI uses the Mammalian
Phenotype (MP) ontology to describe mouse models of human diseases. Using
bioinformatics tools including Phenologs, MouseNET, and the Ontological Discovery
Environment, we tested data associated with MP terms to characterize new
gene-phenotype associations related to ASD. Our integrative analysis using these 
tools identified numerous mouse genotypes that are likely to have previously
uncharacterized autistic-like phenotypes. The genes implicated in these mouse
models had considerable overlap with a set of over 300 genes recently associated 
with ASD due to small, rare copy number variation (Pinto et al., 2010).
Prediction and characterization of autistic mutant mouse alleles assists
researchers in studying the complex nature of ASD and provides a generalizable
approach to candidate gene prioritization.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3263820
PMID: 21397722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Autism Res. 2011 Jun;4(3):221-7. doi: 10.1002/aur.186. Epub 2011 Feb 28.

A de novo 1.5 Mb microdeletion on chromosome 14q23.2-23.3 in a patient with
autism and spherocytosis.

Griswold AJ(1), Ma D, Sacharow SJ, Robinson JL, Jaworski JM, Wright HH, Abramson 
RK, Lybaek H, Oyen N, Cuccaro ML, Gilbert JR, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miami,
Florida 33136, USA.

Autism is a neuro-developmental disorder characterized by deficits in social
interaction and communication as well as restricted interests or repetitive
behaviors. Cytogenetic studies have implicated large chromosomal aberrations in
the etiology of approximately 5-7% of autism patients, and the recent advent of
array-based techniques allows the exploration of submicroscopic copy number
variations (CNVs). We genotyped a 14-year-old boy with autism, spherocytosis and 
other physical dysmorphia, his parents, and two non-autistic siblings with the
Illumina Human 1M Beadchip as part of a study of the molecular genetics of autism
and determined copy number variants using the PennCNV algorithm. We identified
and validated a de novo 1.5 Mb microdeletion of 14q23.2-23.3 in our autistic
patient. This region contains 15 genes, including spectrin beta (SPTB), encoding 
a cytoskeletal protein previously associated with spherocytosis,
methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1 (MTHFD1), a folate metabolizing enzyme 
previously associated with bipoloar disorder and schizophrenia, pleckstrin
homology domain-containing family G member 3 (PLEKHG3), a guanide nucleotide
exchange enriched in the brain, and churchill domain containing protein 1
(CHURC1), homologs of which regulate neuronal development in model organisms.
While a similar deletion has previously been reported in a family with
spherocytosis, severe learning disabilities, and mild mental retardation, this is
the first implication of chr14q23.2-23.3 in the etiology of autism and points to 
MTHFD1, PLEKHG3, and CHURC1 as potential candidate genes contributing to autism
risk.

Copyright (c) 2011, International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMCID: PMC3110642
PMID: 21360829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Jun;156B(4):413-20. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31176. Epub 2011 Feb 25.

PARK2 copy number aberrations in two children presenting with autism spectrum
disorder: further support of an association and possible evidence for a new
microdeletion/microduplication syndrome.

Scheuerle A(1), Wilson K.

Author information: 
(1)Tesserae Genetics, Dallas, Texas, USA. ascheuerle@swbell.net

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Jul;162B(5):484.
    Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Jul;162B(5):485-6.

Microdeletions of PARK2 have been reported previously in seven patients with
autism spectrum disorder. There are no reports of PARK2 microduplications in this
population. Presented are two patients, one with deletion and the other with
duplication, both with autism spectrum disorder, though their syndromic
phenotypes vary. The deletion patient is cognitively normal and ectomorphic: the 
duplication patient is cognitively impaired, underweight and short. Further, the 
microduplication patient has demonstrated adverse medication reactions to
psychotropic medications active in the dopamine metabolic pathway:
cyclopentolate, lisdexamfetamine, methylphenidate. These patients support an
association between PARK2 mutations and autism spectrum disorder and suggest that
duplications may be equally causative. It is hypothesized that the disparate
patient phenotypes may represent a deletion/duplication syndrome and that the
adverse medication reactions may be a pharmacogenetic phenomenon.

Copyright (c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21360662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Apr;17(4):402-11. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.10. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Rare structural variation of synapse and neurotransmission genes in autism.

Gai X(1), Xie HM, Perin JC, Takahashi N, Murphy K, Wenocur AS, D'arcy M, O'Hara
RJ, Goldmuntz E, Grice DE, Shaikh TH, Hakonarson H, Buxbaum JD, Elia J, White PS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Informatics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) comprise a constellation of highly heritable
neuropsychiatric disorders. Genome-wide studies of autistic individuals have
implicated numerous minor risk alleles but few common variants, suggesting a
complex genetic model with many contributing loci. To assess commonality of
biological function among rare risk alleles, we compared functional knowledge of 
genes overlapping inherited structural variants in idiopathic ASD subjects
relative to healthy controls. In this study we show that biological processes
associated with synapse function and neurotransmission are significantly
enriched, with replication, in ASD subjects versus controls. Analysis of
phenotypes observed for mouse models of copy-variant genes established
significant and replicated enrichment of observable phenotypes consistent with
ASD behaviors. Most functional terms retained significance after excluding
previously reported ASD loci. These results implicate several new variants that
involve synaptic function and glutamatergic signaling processes as important
contributors of ASD pathophysiology and suggest a sizable pool of additional
potential ASD risk loci.

PMCID: PMC3314176
PMID: 21358714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Encephale. 2011 Feb;37(1):68-74. doi: 10.1016/j.encep.2010.02.009.

[Genotype/phenotype correlation in autism: genetic models and phenotypic
characterization].

[Article in French]

Bonnet-Brilhault F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unite Inserm 930, imagerie et cerveau, Equipe 1 autisme et troubles du
developpement: psychopathologie, physiopathologie et therapeutique, centre
universitaire de pedopsychiatrie, CHRU de Tours, 2, boulevard Tonnelle, 37000
Tours, France. f.bonnet-brilhault@chu-tours.fr

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders are a class of conditions categorized by
communication problems, ritualistic behaviors, and deficits in social behaviors. 
This class of disorders merges a heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental
disorders regarding some phenotypic and probably physiopathological aspects.
Genetic basis is well admitted, however, considering phenotypic and genotypic
heterogeneity, correspondences between genotype and phenotype have yet to be
established.
LITERATURE FINDINGS: To better identify such correspondences, genetic models have
to be identified and phenotypic markers have to be characterized. Recent insights
show that a variety of genetic mechanisms may be involved in autism spectrum
disorders, i.e. single gene disorders, copy number variations and polygenic
mechanisms. These current genetic models are described. Regarding clinical
aspects, several approaches can be used in genetic studies. Nosographical
approach, especially with the concept of autism spectrum disorders, merges a
large group of disorders with clinical heterogeneity and may fail to identify
clear genotype/phenotype correlations. Dimensional approach referred in genetic
studies to the notion of "Broad Autism Phenotype" related to a constellation of
language, personality, and social-behavioral features present in relatives that
mirror the symptom domains of autism, but are much milder in expression. Studies 
of this broad autism phenotype may provide a potentially important complementary 
approach for detecting the genes involved in these domains. However, control
population used in those studies need to be well characterized too.
Identification of endophenotypes seems to offer more promising results.
Endophenotypes, which are supposed to be more proximal markers of gene action in 
the same biological pathway, linking genes and complex clinical symptoms, are
thought to be less genetically complex than the broader disease phenotype,
indexing a limited aspect of genetic risk for the disorder as a whole. However,
strategies useful to characterize such phenotypic markers (for example,
electrophysiological markers) have to take into account that autism is an early
neurodevelopmental disorder occurring during childhood when brain development and
maturation are in process.
CONCLUSION: Recent genetic results have improved our knowledge in genetic basis
in autism. Nevertheless, correspondences with phenotypic markers remain
challenging according to phenotypic and genotypic heterogeneity.

Copyright (c) 2010 L'Encephale, Paris. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 21349377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Am J Psychiatry. 2011 Apr;168(4):408-17. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09111660.
Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Maternally derived microduplications at 15q11-q13: implication of imprinted genes
in psychotic illness.

Ingason A(1), Kirov G, Giegling I, Hansen T, Isles AR, Jakobsen KD, Kristinsson
KT, le Roux L, Gustafsson O, Craddock N, Moller HJ, McQuillin A, Muglia P, Cichon
S, Rietschel M, Ophoff RA, Djurovic S, Andreassen OA, Pietilainen OP, Peltonen L,
Dempster E, Collier DA, St Clair D, Rasmussen HB, Glenthoj BY, Kiemeney LA,
Franke B, Tosato S, Bonetto C, Saemundsen E, Hreidarsson SJ; GROUP Investigators,
Nothen MM, Gurling H, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Sigurdsson E, Petursson H,
Stefansson H, Rujescu D, Stefansson K, Werge T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Center Sct. Hans,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry. 2012 Jan;169(1):96-7; author reply 97.
    Am J Psychiatry. 2011 Apr;168(4):350-3.

OBJECTIVE: Rare copy number variants have been implicated in different
neurodevelopmental disorders, with the same copy number variants often increasing
risk of more than one of these phenotypes. In a discovery sample of 22
schizophrenia patients with an early onset of illness (10-15 years of age), the
authors observed in one patient a maternally derived 15q11-q13 duplication
overlapping the Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome critical region. This prompted
investigation of the role of 15q11-q13 duplications in psychotic illness.
METHOD: The authors scanned 7,582 patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective 
disorder and 41,370 comparison subjects without known psychiatric illness for
copy number variants at 15q11-q13 and determined the parental origin of
duplications using methylation-sensitive Southern hybridization analysis.
RESULTS: Duplications were found in four case patients and five comparison
subjects. All four case patients had maternally derived duplications (0.05%),
while only three of the five comparison duplications were maternally derived
(0.007%), resulting in a significant excess of maternally derived duplications in
case patients (odds ratio=7.3). This excess is compatible with earlier
observations that risk for psychosis in people with Prader-Willi syndrome caused 
by maternal uniparental disomy is much higher than in those caused by deletion of
the paternal chromosome.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the presence of two maternal copies of a
fragment of chromosome 15q11.2-q13.1 that overlaps with the Prader-Willi/Angelman
syndrome critical region may be a rare risk factor for schizophrenia and other
psychoses. Given that maternal duplications of this region are among the most
consistent cytogenetic observations in autism, the findings provide further
support for a shared genetic etiology between autism and psychosis.

PMCID: PMC3428917
PMID: 21324950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Mar;156(2):115-24. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31142. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Copy number variation characteristics in subpopulations of patients with autism
spectrum disorders.

Bremer A(1), Giacobini M, Eriksson M, Gustavsson P, Nordin V, Fernell E, Gillberg
C, Nordgren A, Uppstromer A, Anderlid BM, Nordenskjold M, Schoumans J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. anna.bremer@ki.se

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a heterogeneous group of disorders with a
complex genetic etiology. We used high-resolution whole genome array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) to screen 223 ASD patients for gene
dose alterations associated with susceptibility for autism. Clinically
significant copy number variations (CNVs) were identified in 18 individuals (8%),
of which 9 cases (4%) had de novo aberrations. In addition, 20 individuals (9%)
were shown to have CNVs of unclear clinical relevance. Among these, 13 cases
carried rare but inherited CNVs that may increase the risk for developing ASDs,
while parental samples were unavailable in the remaining seven cases.
Classification of all patients into different phenotypic and inheritance pattern 
groups indicated the presence of different CNV patterns in different patient
groups. Clinically relevant CNVs were more common in syndromic cases compared to 
non-syndromic cases. Rare inherited CNVs were present in a higher proportion of
ASD cases having first- or second-degree relatives with an ASD-related
neuropsychiatric phenotype in comparison with cases without reported heredity
(P = 0.0096). We conclude that rare CNVs, encompassing potential candidate
regions for ASDs, increase the susceptibility for the development of ASDs and
related neuropsychiatric disorders giving us further insight into the complex
genetics underlying ASDs.

Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21302340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genet Med. 2011 May;13(5):377-84. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182076c0c.

Copy number variation in the dosage-sensitive 16p11.2 interval accounts for only 
a small proportion of autism incidence: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Walsh KM(1), Bracken MB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Perinatal Pediatric and Environmental Epidemiology, Yale School of 
Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. kyle.walsh@yale.edu

PURPOSE: Autism is one of the most heritable complex disorders, but the genetic
etiology of autism spectrum disorders is unexplained in [?] 90% of cases. Highly
penetrant microdeletions and microduplications of 16p11.2 contribute to the
pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorder, but the extent to which these variants 
account for the total burden of idiopathic autism spectrum disorders has not been
systematically investigated.
METHODS: A systematic literature review and meta-analysis were performed to
determine the prevalence of these variants among individuals diagnosed with
autism spectrum disorders. A planned subgroup analysis was conducted to assess
prevalence differences between sporadic and familial autism spectrum disorder
cases.
RESULTS: In the combined analysis of 3613 idiopathic autism spectrum disorder
cases from seven studies, the meta-analytic prevalence of these microdeletions
and microduplications was 0.76% (95% CI, 0.51-1.12%). When stratified by copy
number variant-type, the prevalence of microdeletions was 0.50% (95% CI,
0.31-0.82%) and the prevalence of microduplications was 0.28% (95% CI,
0.14-0.56%). Sporadic autism spectrum disorder cases showed only a slightly
higher prevalence than familial cases.
CONCLUSION: The number needed to test to identify one such variant is 132
patients (95% CI, 89-198). Such information, especially as it pertains to
diagnostic yield in genetic testing, should prove useful to clinicians
considering chromosomal microarray analysis in subjects with autism spectrum
disorders.

PMID: 21289514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Psychiatry. 2011 Mar;168(3):253-6. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10091340. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

After GWAS: searching for genetic risk for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.

Gershon ES(1), Alliey-Rodriguez N, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago,
USA. egershon@yoda.bsd.uchicago.edu

Ten years ago it was widely expected that the genetic basis of common disease
would be resolved by genome-wide association studies (GWAS), large-scale studies 
in which the entire genome is covered by genetic markers. However, the bulk of
heritable variance remains unexplained. The authors consider several alternative 
research strategies. For instance, whereas it has been hypothesized that a common
disease is associated primarily with common genetic variants, it is now plausible
that multiple rare variants each have a potent effect on disease risk and that
they could accumulate to become a substantial component of common disease risk.
This idea has become more appealing since the discovery that copy number variants
(CNVs) are a substantial source of human mutations and are associated with
multiple common diseases. CNVs are structural genomic variants consisting of
microinsertions, microdeletions, and transpositions in the human genome. It has
been argued that numerous rare CNVs are plausible causes of a substantial
proportion of common disease, and rare CNVs have been found to be potent risk
factors in schizophrenia and autism. Another approach is to "parse the genome,"
i.e., reanalyze subsets of current GWAS data, since the noise inherent in
genome-wide approaches may be hiding valid associations. Lastly, technological
advances and declining costs may allow large-scale genome-wide sequencing that
would comprehensively identify all genetic variants. Study groups even larger
than the 10,000 subjects in current meta-analyses would be required, but the
outcomes may lead to resolution of our current dilemma in common diseases: Where 
is the missing heritability?

PMID: 21285144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Am J Psychiatry. 2011 Mar;168(3):302-16. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10060876.
Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Copy number variants in schizophrenia: confirmation of five previous findings and
new evidence for 3q29 microdeletions and VIPR2 duplications.

Levinson DF(1), Duan J, Oh S, Wang K, Sanders AR, Shi J, Zhang N, Mowry BJ,
Olincy A, Amin F, Cloninger CR, Silverman JM, Buccola NG, Byerley WF, Black DW,
Kendler KS, Freedman R, Dudbridge F, Pe'er I, Hakonarson H, Bergen SE, Fanous AH,
Holmans PA, Gejman PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Palo
Alto, CA 94304-5797, USA. dflev@stanford.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate previously reported associations of copy number variants
(CNVs) with schizophrenia and to identify additional associations, the authors
analyzed CNVs in the Molecular Genetics of Schizophrenia study (MGS) and
additional available data.
METHOD: After quality control, MGS data for 3,945 subjects with schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective disorder and 3,611 screened comparison subjects were available
for analysis of rare CNVs (<1% frequency). CNV detection thresholds were chosen
that maximized concordance in 151 duplicate assays. Pointwise and genewise
analyses were carried out, as well as analyses of previously reported regions.
Selected regions were visually inspected and confirmed with quantitative
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In analyses of MGS data combined with other available data sets, odds
ratios of 7.5 or greater were observed for previously reported deletions in
chromosomes 1q21.1, 15q13.3, and 22q11.21, duplications in 16p11.2, and
exon-disrupting deletions in NRXN1. The most consistently supported candidate
associations across data sets included a 1.6-Mb deletion in chromosome 3q29 (21
genes, TFRC to BDH1) that was previously described in a mild-moderate mental
retardation syndrome, exonic duplications in the gene for vasoactive intestinal
peptide receptor 2 (VIPR2), and exonic duplications in C16orf72. The case
subjects had a modestly higher genome-wide number of gene-containing deletions
(>100 kb and >1 Mb) but not duplications.
CONCLUSIONS: The data strongly confirm the association of schizophrenia with
1q21.1, 15q13.3, and 22q11.21 deletions, 16p11.2 duplications, and exonic NRXN1
deletions. These CNVs, as well as 3q29 deletions, are also associated with mental
retardation, autism spectrum disorders, and epilepsy. Additional candidate genes 
and regions, including VIPR2, were identified. Study of the mechanisms underlying
these associations should shed light on the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.

PMID: 21285140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Med Genet. 2011 Mar;48(3):197-204. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.082412. Epub 2011 Jan 
28.

High incidence of recurrent copy number variants in patients with isolated and
syndromic Mullerian aplasia.

Nik-Zainal S(1), Strick R, Storer M, Huang N, Rad R, Willatt L, Fitzgerald T,
Martin V, Sandford R, Carter NP, Janecke AR, Renner SP, Oppelt PG, Oppelt P,
Schulze C, Brucker S, Hurles M, Beckmann MW, Strissel PL, Shaw-Smith C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University-Clinic Erlangen, Erlangen,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Congenital malformations involving the Mullerian ducts are observed
in around 5% of infertile women. Complete aplasia of the uterus, cervix, and
upper vagina, also termed Mullerian aplasia or Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser
(MRKH) syndrome, occurs with an incidence of around 1 in 4500 female births, and 
occurs in both isolated and syndromic forms. Previous reports have suggested that
a proportion of cases, especially syndromic cases, are caused by variation in
copy number at different genomic loci.
METHODS: In order to obtain an overview of the contribution of copy number
variation to both isolated and syndromic forms of Mullerian aplasia, copy number 
assays were performed in a series of 63 cases, of which 25 were syndromic and 38 
isolated.
RESULTS: A high incidence (9/63, 14%) of recurrent copy number variants in this
cohort is reported here. These comprised four cases of microdeletion at 16p11.2, 
an autism susceptibility locus not previously associated with Mullerian aplasia, 
four cases of microdeletion at 17q12, and one case of a distal 22q11.2
microdeletion. Microdeletions at 16p11.2 and 17q12 were found in 4/38 (10.5%)
cases with isolated Mullerian aplasia, and at 16p11.2, 17q12 and 22q11.2 (distal)
in 5/25 cases (20%) with syndromic Mullerian aplasia.
CONCLUSION: The finding of microdeletion at 16p11.2 in 2/38 (5%) of isolated and 
2/25 (8%) of syndromic cases suggests a significant contribution of this copy
number variant alone to the pathogenesis of Mullerian aplasia. Overall, the high 
incidence of recurrent copy number variants in all forms of Mullerian aplasia has
implications for the understanding of the aetiopathogenesis of the condition, and
for genetic counselling in families affected by it.

PMCID: PMC3322361
PMID: 21278390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Epilepsia. 2011 Mar;52(3):423-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02932.x. Epub
2011 Jan 26.

Epilepsy and the new cytogenetics.

Mulley JC(1), Mefford HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Directorate of Genetics and Molecular
Pathology, SA Pathology at Women's and Children's Hospital, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. john.mulley@health.sa.gov.au

We set out to review the extent to which molecular karyotyping has overtaken
conventional cytogenetics in applications related to epilepsy. Multiplex
ligase-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) targeted to predetermined regions
such as SCN1A and KCNQ2 has been effectively applied over the last half a decade,
and oligonucleotide array comparative genome hybridization (array CGH) is now
well established for genome-wide exploration of microchromosomal variation. Array
CGH is applicable to the characterization of lesions present in both sporadic and
familial epilepsy, especially where clinical features of affected cases depart
from established syndromes. Copy number variants (CNVs) associated with epilepsy 
and a range of other syndromes and conditions can be recurrent due to nonallelic 
homologous recombination in regions of segmental duplication. The most common of 
the recurrent microdeletions associated with generalized epilepsy are typically
seen at a frequency of [?] 1% at 15q13.3, 16p13.11, and 15q11.2, sites that also
confer susceptibility for intellectual disability, autism, and schizophrenia.
Incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity confound the established rules of
cytogenetics for determining the pathogenicity for novel CNVs; however, as
knowledge is gained for each of the recurrent CNVs, this is translated to genetic
counseling. CNVs play a significant role in the susceptibility profile for
epilepsies, with complex genetics and their comorbidities both from the
"hotspots" defined by segmental duplication and elsewhere in the genome where
their location and size are often novel.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. (c) 2011 International League Against Epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC3079368
PMID: 21269290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Mar;62(3):1519-26. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.024.
Epub 2011 Jan 22.

The role of neurexins in schizophrenia and autistic spectrum disorder.

Reichelt AC(1), Rodgers RJ, Clapcote SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Membrane & Systems Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, West
Yorkshire LS2 9JT, UK. reicheltac@cardiff.ac.uk

Schizophrenia and autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) are common, chronic mental
conditions with both genetic and environmental components to their aetiology. The
identification of genes influencing susceptibility to these disorders offers a
rational route towards a clearer understanding of the neurobiology, and with this
the prospect of treatment and prevention strategies tailored towards the
remediation of the altered pathways. Copy number variants (CNVs) underlie many
serious illnesses, including neurological and neurodevelopmental syndromes.
Recent studies assessing copy number variation in ASD and schizophrenia have
repeatedly observed heterozygous deletions eliminating exons of the neurexin-1a
gene (but not the neurexin-1b gene) in patients with ASD and schizophrenia. The
neurexins are synaptic adhesion proteins that are known to play a key role in
synaptic formation and maintenance. The functional significance of the recurrent 
deletion is poorly understood, but the availability of mice with deletion of the 
promoter and first exon of neurexin-1a provides direct access to the biological
effects of neurexin-1a disruption on phenotypes relevant to ASD and
schizophrenia. We review the evidence for the role of neurexin-1a in
schizophrenia and ASD, and consider how genetic disruption of neurexin-1a may
underpin the neuropathology contributing to these distinct neurodevelopmental
disorders.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21262241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Behav Genet. 2011 May;41(3):373-80. doi: 10.1007/s10519-011-9447-4. Epub 2011 Jan
23.

Genotype-phenotype association studies of chromosome 8p inverted duplication
deletion syndrome.

Fisch GS(1), Davis R, Youngblom J, Gregg J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Promotion, Colleges of Dentistry and
Nursing, New York University, USA. gene.fisch@nyu.edu

Individuals diagnosed with chromosome 8p inverted duplication deletion
(invdupdel(8p)) manifest a wide range of clinical features and cognitive
impairment. The purpose of this study is to employ array CGH technology to define
more precisely the cytogenetic breakpoints and regions of copy number variation
found in several individuals with invdupdel(8p), and compare these results with
their neuropsychological characteristics. We examined the cognitive-behavioral
features of two male and two female children, ages 3-15 years, with
invdupdel(8p). We noted cognitive deficits that ranged from mild to severe, and
adaptive behavior composites that ranged from significantly to substantially
lower than adequate levels. CARS scores, a measure of autistic behavior,
identified three children with autism or autistic-like features. Three of the
four children exhibited attention deficits and hyperactivity consistent with a
DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of ADHD. One child showed extreme emotional lability.
Interestingly, intellectual disability was not correlated with deletion size, nor
was the deletion location associated with the autistic phenotype. On the other
hand, the duplication length in 8p21.1/8p22 was associated with cognitive
deficit. In addition, a small locus of over-expression in 8p21.3 was common for
all three participants diagnosed as autistic. A limitation of the study is its
small sample size. Further analyses of the deleted and over-expressed regions are
needed to ascertain the genes involved in cognitive function and, possibly,
autism.

PMID: 21259039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Autism Res. 2011 Apr;4(2):89-97. doi: 10.1002/aur.173. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

A genotype resource for postmortem brain samples from the Autism Tissue Program.

Wintle RF(1), Lionel AC, Hu P, Ginsberg SD, Pinto D, Thiruvahindrapduram B, Wei
J, Marshall CR, Pickett J, Cook EH, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Erratum in
    Autism Res. 2011 Aug;4(4):314.

The Autism Tissue Program (ATP), a science program of Autism Speaks, provides
researchers with access to well-characterized postmortem brain tissues.
Researchers access these tissues through a peer-reviewed, project-based approval 
process, and obtain related clinical information from a secure, online
informatics portal. However, few of these samples have DNA banked from other
sources (such as a blood sample from the same individual), hindering
genotype-phenotype correlation and interpretation of gene expression data derived
from the banked brain tissue. Here, we describe an initiative to extract DNA from
Brodmann Area 19, and genotype these samples using both the Affymetrix
Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 and the Illumina Human1M-Duo DNA Analysis
BeadChip genome-wide microarray technologies. We additionally verify reported
gender, and infer ethnic background from the single nucleotide polymorphism data.
We have also used a rigorous, multiple algorithm approach to identify genomic
copy number variation (CNV) from these array data. Following an initial proof of 
principle study using two samples, 52 experimental samples, consisting of 27
subjects with confirmed or suspected autism and related disorders, 5 subjects
with cytogenetically visible duplications of 15q, 2 with epilepsy and 18
age-matched normal controls were processed, yielding high-quality genotype data
in all cases. The genotype and CNV data are provided via the ATP informatics
portal as a resource for the autism research community.

Copyright (c) 2011, International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMID: 21254448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 May;19(5):588-92. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.221. Epub 2011 Jan
5.

Analysis of genetic deletions and duplications in the University College London
bipolar disorder case control sample.

McQuillin A(1), Bass N, Anjorin A, Lawrence J, Kandaswamy R, Lydall G, Moran J,
Sklar P, Purcell S, Gurling H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Psychiatry Laboratory, Windeyer Institute of Medical Sciences,
Research Department of Mental Health Sciences, University College London, London,
UK. a.mcquillin@ucl.ac.uk

Genetic deletions and duplications known as copy number variants have been
strongly implicated in genetic susceptibility to schizophrenia, autism, attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder and epilepsy. The overall rate of copy number
variants in the University College London (UCL) bipolar disorder sample was found
to be slightly lower than the rate in controls. This finding confirms the results
from other studies that have also shown no increased rate of copy number variants
in bipolar disorder. However, some rare duplications and deletions were observed 
only in bipolar disorder cases and not in controls, these included some that had 
previously been detected only in rare cases of bipolar disorder. We conclude that
copy-number variant analysis shows no obvious sharing of the same genetic
susceptibility between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Copy number variants
do not seem to have an important role in susceptibility to bipolar disorder, they
may, however, still represent a rare cause of the disease, although the evidence 
for this is far from clear.

PMCID: PMC3083610
PMID: 21206513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2011 Apr;52(4):504-16. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02348.x. Epub 2011 Jan 4.

Annual Research Review: The promise of stem cell research for neuropsychiatric
disorders.

Vaccarino FM(1), Urban AE, Stevens HE, Szekely A, Abyzov A, Grigorenko EL,
Gerstein M, Weissman S.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Department of Neurobiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. flora.vaccarino@yale.edu

The study of the developing brain has begun to shed light on the underpinnings of
both early and adult onset neuropsychiatric disorders. Neuroimaging of the human 
brain across developmental time points and the use of model animal systems have
combined to reveal brain systems and gene products that may play a role in autism
spectrum disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, obsessive
compulsive disorder and many other neurodevelopmental conditions. However,
precisely how genes may function in human brain development and how they interact
with each other leading to psychiatric disorders is unknown. Because of an
increasing understanding of neural stem cells and how the nervous system
subsequently develops from these cells, we have now the ability to study
disorders of the nervous system in a new way - by rewinding and reviewing the
development of human neural cells. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs),
developed from mature somatic cells, have allowed the development of specific
cells in patients to be observed in real time. Moreover, they have allowed some
neuronal-specific abnormalities to be corrected with pharmacological intervention
in tissue culture. These exciting advances based on the use of iPSCs hold great
promise for understanding, diagnosing and, possibly, treating psychiatric
disorders. Specifically, examination of iPSCs from typically developing
individuals will reveal how basic cellular processes and genetic differences
contribute to individually unique nervous systems. Moreover, by comparing iPSCs
from typically developing individuals and patients, differences at stem cell
stages, through neural differentiation, and into the development of functional
neurons may be identified that will reveal opportunities for intervention. The
application of such techniques to early onset neuropsychiatric disorders is still
on the horizon but has become a reality of current research efforts as a
consequence of the revelations of many years of basic developmental
neurobiological science.

(c) 2011 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry (c) 2011 Association
for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.

PMCID: PMC3124336
PMID: 21204834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Transl Psychiatry. 2011 Aug 30;1:e34. doi: 10.1038/tp.2011.30.

Increased de novo copy number variants in the offspring of older males.

Flatscher-Bader T(1), Foldi CJ, Chong S, Whitelaw E, Moser RJ, Burne TH, Eyles
DW, McGrath JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD,
Australia.

The offspring of older fathers have an increased risk of neurodevelopmental
disorders, such as schizophrenia and autism. In light of the evidence implicating
copy number variants (CNVs) with schizophrenia and autism, we used a mouse model 
to explore the hypothesis that the offspring of older males have an increased
risk of de novo CNVs. C57BL/6J sires that were 3- and 12-16-months old were mated
with 3-month-old dams to create control offspring and offspring of old sires,
respectively. Applying genome-wide microarray screening technology, 7 distinct
CNVs were identified in a set of 12 offspring and their parents. Competitive
quantitative PCR confirmed these CNVs in the original set and also established
their frequency in an independent set of 77 offspring and their parents. On the
basis of the combined samples, six de novo CNVs were detected in the offspring of
older sires, whereas none were detected in the control group. Two of the CNVs
were associated with behavioral and/or neuroanatomical phenotypic features. One
of the de novo CNVs involved Auts2 (autism susceptibility candidate 2), and other
CNVs included genes linked to schizophrenia, autism and brain development. This
is the first experimental demonstration that the offspring of older males have an
increased risk of de novo CNVs. Our results support the hypothesis that the
offspring of older fathers have an increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders
such as schizophrenia and autism by generation of de novo CNVs in the male
germline.

PMCID: PMC3309504
PMID: 22832608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1431-42. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.019.

Whole-genome sequencing in autism identifies hot spots for de novo germline
mutation.

Michaelson JJ(1), Shi Y, Gujral M, Zheng H, Malhotra D, Jin X, Jian M, Liu G,
Greer D, Bhandari A, Wu W, Corominas R, Peoples A, Koren A, Gore A, Kang S, Lin
GN, Estabillo J, Gadomski T, Singh B, Zhang K, Akshoomoff N, Corsello C,
McCarroll S, Iakoucheva LM, Li Y, Wang J, Sebat J.

Author information: 
(1)Beyster Center for Genomics of Psychiatric Diseases, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1399-400.

De novo mutation plays an important role in autism spectrum disorders (ASDs).
Notably, pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) are characterized by high
mutation rates. We hypothesize that hypermutability is a property of ASD genes
and may also include nucleotide-substitution hot spots. We investigated global
patterns of germline mutation by whole-genome sequencing of monozygotic twins
concordant for ASD and their parents. Mutation rates varied widely throughout the
genome (by 100-fold) and could be explained by intrinsic characteristics of DNA
sequence and chromatin structure. Dense clusters of mutations within individual
genomes were attributable to compound mutation or gene conversion.
Hypermutability was a characteristic of genes involved in ASD and other diseases.
In addition, genes impacted by mutations in this study were associated with ASD
in independent exome-sequencing data sets. Our findings suggest that regional
hypermutation is a significant factor shaping patterns of genetic variation and
disease risk in humans.

Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3712641
PMID: 23260136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Dec 19;13:123. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-123.

Genome-wide sequencing for the identification of rearrangements associated with
Tourette syndrome and obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Hooper SD(1), Johansson AC, Tellgren-Roth C, Stattin EL, Dahl N, Cavelier L, Feuk
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory and
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala 751 85, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a neuropsychiatric disorder in children
characterized by motor and verbal tics. Although several genes have been
suggested in the etiology of TS, the genetic mechanisms remain poorly understood.
METHODS: Using cytogenetics and FISH analysis, we identified an apparently
balanced t(6,22)(q16.2;p13) in a male patient with TS and obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD). In order to map the breakpoints and to identify additional
submicroscopic rearrangements, we performed whole genome mate-pair sequencing and
CGH-array analysis on DNA from the proband.
RESULTS: Sequence and CGH array analysis revealed a 400 kb deletion located 1.3
Mb telomeric of the chromosome 6q breakpoint, which has not been reported in
controls. The deletion affects three genes (GPR63, NDUFA4 and KLHL32) and
overlaps a region previously found deleted in a girl with autistic features and
speech delay. The proband's mother, also a carrier of the translocation, was
diagnosed with OCD and shares the deletion. We also describe a further
potentially related rearrangement which, while unmapped in Homo sapiens, was
consistent with the chimpanzee genome.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that genome-wide sequencing at relatively low resolution
can be used for the identification of submicroscopic rearrangements. We also show
that large rearrangements may escape detection using standard analysis of whole
genome sequencing data. Our findings further provide a candidate region for TS
and OCD on chromosome 6q16.

PMCID: PMC3556158
PMID: 23253088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2013 Jan;15(1):334. doi: 10.1007/s11920-012-0334-3.

The genetics of Autism Spectrum Disorders--a guide for clinicians.

Heil KM(1), Schaaf CP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 134b, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany. Karsten.M.Heil@gmail.com

Recent advances in genetic testing technology have made chromosome microarray
analysis (CMA) a first-tier clinical diagnostic test for Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASDs). Two main types of microarrays are available, single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) arrays and array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH),
each with its own advantages and disadvantages in ASDs testing. Rare genetic
variants, and copy number variants (CNVs) in particular, have been shown to play 
a major role in ASDs. More than 200 autism susceptibility genes have been
identified to date, and complex patterns of inheritance, such as oligogenic
heterozygosity, appear to contribute to the etiopathogenesis of ASDs. Incomplete 
penetrance and variable expressivity represent particular challenges in the
interpretation of CMA testing of autistic individuals. This review aims to
provide an overview of autism genetics for the practicing physician and gives
hands-on advice on how to follow-up on abnormal CMA findings in individuals with 
neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMID: 23250815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e48835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048835. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Structural, genetic, and functional signatures of disordered neuro-immunological 
development in autism spectrum disorder.

Saxena V(1), Ramdas S, Ochoa CR, Wallace D, Bhide P, Kohane I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
Massachusetts, United States of America. vishal@mit.edu

BACKGROUND: Numerous linkage studies have been performed in pedigrees of Autism
Spectrum Disorders, and these studies point to diverse loci and etiologies of
autism in different pedigrees. The underlying pattern may be identified by an
integrative approach, especially since ASD is a complex disorder manifested
through many loci.
METHOD: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) was studied through two different and
independent genome-scale measurement modalities. We analyzed the results of copy 
number variation in autism and triangulated these with linkage studies.
RESULTS: Consistently across both genome-scale measurements, the same two
molecular themes emerged: immune/chemokine pathways and developmental pathways.
CONCLUSION: Linkage studies in aggregate do indeed share a thematic consistency, 
one which structural analyses recapitulate with high significance. These results 
also show for the first time that genomic profiling of pathways using a
recombination distance metric can capture pathways that are consistent with those
obtained from copy number variations (CNV).

PMCID: PMC3514226
PMID: 23239965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jan;161A(1):120-30. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35698. Epub 2012
Dec 3.

Clinical utility of the X-chromosome array.

Zarate YA(1), Dwivedi A, Bartel FO, Bellomo MA, Cathey SS, Champaigne NL,
Clarkson LK, Dupont BR, Everman DB, Geer JS, Gordon BC, Lichty AW, Lyons MJ,
Rogers RC, Saul RA, Schroer RJ, Skinner SA, Stevenson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, USA. yzarate@ggc.org

Previous studies have limited the use of specific X-chromosome array designed
platforms to the evaluation of patients with intellectual disability. In this
retrospective analysis, we reviewed the clinical utility of an X-chromosome array
in a variety of scenarios. We divided patients according to the indication for
the test into four defined categories: (1) autism spectrum disorders and/or
developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (ASDs/DD/ID) with known family
history of neurocognitive disorders; (2) ASDs/DD/ID without known family history 
of neurocognitive disorders; (3) breakpoint definition of an abnormality detected
by a different cytogenetic test; and (4) evaluation of suspected or known
X-linked conditions. A total of 59 studies were ordered with 27 copy number
variants detected in 25 patients (25/59 = 42%). The findings were deemed
pathogenic/likely pathogenic (16/59 = 27%), benign (4/59 = 7%) or uncertain
(7/59 = 12%). We place particular emphasis on the utility of this test for the
diagnostic evaluation of families affected with X-linked conditions and how it
compares to whole genome arrays in this setting. In conclusion, the X-chromosome 
array frequently detects genomic alterations of the X chromosome and it has
advantages when evaluating some specific X-linked conditions. However, careful
interpretation and correlation with clinical findings is needed to determine the 
significance of such changes. When the X-chromosome array was used to confirm a
suspected X-linked condition, it had a yield of 63% (12/19) and was useful in the
evaluation and risk assessment of patients and families.

Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23208842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Jan;162B(1):24-35. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32114. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Epilepsy with cognitive deficit and autism spectrum disorders: prospective
diagnosis by array CGH.

Nicholl J(1), Waters W, Suwalski S, Brown S, Hull Y, Harbord MG, Entwistle J,
Thompson S, Clark D, Pridmore C, Haan E, Barnett C, McGregor L, Liebelt J,
Thompson EM, Friend K, Bain SM, Yu S, Mulley JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, SA Pathology at Women's and Children's
Hospital, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

The clinical significance of chromosomal microdeletions and microduplications was
predicted based on their gene content, de novo or familial inheritance and
accumulated knowledge recorded on public databases. A patient group comprised of 
247 cases with epilepsy and its common co-morbidities of developmental delay,
intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and congenital abnormalities 
was reviewed prospectively in a diagnostic setting using a standardized
oligo-array CGH platform. Seventy-three (29.6%) had copy number variations (CNVs)
and of these 73 cases, 27 (37.0%) had CNVs that were likely causative. These 27
cases comprised 10.9% of the 247 cases reviewed. The range of pathogenic CNVs
associated with seizures was consistent with the existence of many genetic
determinants for epilepsy.

Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23184456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jan 4;587(1):54-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.047. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

Autistic-like behavioral phenotypes in a mouse model with copy number variation
of the CAPS2/CADPS2 gene.

Sadakata T(1), Shinoda Y, Oka M, Sekine Y, Furuichi T.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Scientific Research Leaders Development Unit, Gunma University,
Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. sadakata-1024@umin.ac.jp

Ca2+-dependent activator protein for secretion 2 (CAPS2 or CADPS2) facilitates
secretion and trafficking of dense-core vesicles. Recent genome-wide association 
studies of autism have identified several microdeletions due to copy number
variation (CNV) in one of the chromosome 7q31.32 alleles on which the locus for
CAPS2 is located in autistic patients. To evaluate the biological significance of
reducing CAPS2 copy number, we analyzed CAPS2 heterozygous mice. Our present
findings suggest that adequate levels of CAPS2 protein are critical for normal
brain development and behavior, and that allelic changes due to CNV may
contribute to autistic symptoms in combination with deficits in other
autism-associated genes.

Copyright (c) 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):816-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds476. Epub 2012 Nov
11.

A genome-wide study shows a limited contribution of rare copy number variants to 
Alzheimer's disease risk.

Chapman J(1), Rees E, Harold D, Ivanov D, Gerrish A, Sims R, Hollingworth P,
Stretton A; GERAD1 Consortium, Holmans P, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC, Williams J,
Kirov G.

Collaborators: Harold D, Sims R, Gerrish A, Chapman J, Moskvina V, Abraham R,
Hollingworth P, Hamshere M, Pahwa JS, Dowzell K, Williams A, Jones N, Thomas C,
Stretton A, Morgan A, Williams K, Thomas S, Lovestone S, Powell J, Proitsi P,
Lupton MK, Brayne C, Rubinsztein DC, Gill M, Lawlor B, Lynch A, Morgan K, Brown
K, Passmore P, Craig D, McGuinness B, Johnston JA, Todd S, Holmes C, Mann D,
Smith AD, Love S, Kehoe PG, Hardy J, Guerreiro R, Singleton A, Mead S, Fox N,
Rossor M, Collinge J, Maier W, Jessen F, Heun R, Kolsch H, Schurmann B, Ramirez
A, van den Bussche H, Heuser I, Kornhuber J, Wiltfang J, Dichgans M, Frolich L,
Hampel H, Hull M, Rujescu D, Goate A, Kauwe JS, Cruchaga C, Nowotny P, Morris JC,
Mayo K, Livingston G, Bass NJ, Gurling H, McQuillin A, Gwilliam R, Deloukas P,
Nothen MM, Holmans P, O'Donovan M, Owen MJ, Williams J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

We assessed the role of rare copy number variants (CNVs) in Alzheimer's disease
(AD) using intensity data from 3260 AD cases and 1290 age-matched controls from
the genome-wide association study (GWAS) conducted by the Genetic and
Environmental Risk for Alzheimer's disease Consortium (GERAD). We did not observe
a significant excess of rare CNVs in cases, although we did identify duplications
overlapping APP and CR1 which may be pathogenic. We looked for an excess of CNVs 
in loci which have been highlighted in previous AD CNV studies, but did not
replicate previous findings. Through pathway analyses, we observed suggestive
evidence for biological overlap between single nucleotide polymorphisms and CNVs 
in AD susceptibility. We also identified that our sample of elderly controls
harbours significantly fewer deletions >1 Mb than younger control sets in
previous CNV studies on schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (P = 8.9 x 10(-4) and 
0.024, respectively), raising the possibility that healthy elderly individuals
have a reduced rate of large deletions. Thus, in contrast to diseases such as
schizophrenia, autism and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, CNVs do not
appear to make a significant contribution to the development of AD.

PMCID: PMC3554198
PMID: 23148125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nat Neurosci. 2012 Dec;15(12):1723-8. doi: 10.1038/nn.3261. Epub 2012 Nov 11.

Diverse types of genetic variation converge on functional gene networks involved 
in schizophrenia.

Gilman SR(1), Chang J, Xu B, Bawa TS, Gogos JA, Karayiorgou M, Vitkup D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York, USA.

Despite the successful identification of several relevant genomic loci, the
underlying molecular mechanisms of schizophrenia remain largely unclear. We
developed a computational approach (NETBAG+) that allows an integrated analysis
of diverse disease-related genetic data using a unified statistical framework.
The application of this approach to schizophrenia-associated genetic variations, 
obtained using unbiased whole-genome methods, allowed us to identify several
cohesive gene networks related to axon guidance, neuronal cell mobility, synaptic
function and chromosomal remodeling. The genes forming the networks are highly
expressed in the brain, with higher brain expression during prenatal development.
The identified networks are functionally related to genes previously implicated
in schizophrenia, autism and intellectual disability. A comparative analysis of
copy number variants associated with autism and schizophrenia suggests that
although the molecular networks implicated in these distinct disorders may be
related, the mutations associated with each disease are likely to lead, at least 
on average, to different functional consequences.

PMCID: PMC3689007
PMID: 23143521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Jun;21(6):602-12. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.230. Epub 2012 Oct
17.

The 2q37-deletion syndrome: an update of the clinical spectrum including
overweight, brachydactyly and behavioural features in 14 new patients.

Leroy C(1), Landais E, Briault S, David A, Tassy O, Gruchy N, Delobel B, Gregoire
MJ, Leheup B, Taine L, Lacombe D, Delrue MA, Toutain A, Paubel A, Mugneret F,
Thauvin-Robinet C, Arpin S, Le Caignec C, Jonveaux P, Beri M, Leporrier N, Motte 
J, Fiquet C, Brichet O, Mozelle-Nivoix M, Sabouraud P, Golovkine N, Bednarek N,
Gaillard D, Doco-Fenzy M.

Author information: 
(1)CHU-Reims, HMB, Service de genetique, Reims, France.

The 2q37 locus is one of the most commonly deleted subtelomeric regions. Such a
deletion has been identified in >100 patients by telomeric fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis and, less frequently, by array-based comparative
genomic hybridization (array-CGH). A recognizable '2q37-deletion syndrome' or
Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy-like syndrome has been previously described.
To better map the deletion and further refine this deletional syndrome, we formed
a collaboration with the Association of French Language Cytogeneticists to
collect 14 new intellectually deficient patients with a distal or interstitial
2q37 deletion characterized by FISH and array-CGH. Patients exhibited facial
dysmorphism (13/14) and brachydactyly (10/14), associated with behavioural
problems, autism or autism spectrum disorders of varying severity and overweight 
or obesity. The deletions in these 14 new patients measured from 2.6 to 8.8 Mb.
Although the major role of HDAC4 has been demonstrated, the phenotypic
involvement of several other genes in the deleted regions is unknown. We further 
refined the genotype-phenotype correlation for the 2q37 deletion. To do this, we 
examined the smallest overlapping deleted region for candidate genes for skeletal
malformations (facial dysmorphism and brachydactyly), overweight, behavioural
problems and seizures, using clinical data, a review of the literature, and the
Manteia database. Among the candidate genes identified, we focus on the roles of 
PRLH, PER2, TWIST2, CAPN10, KIF1A, FARP2, D2HGDH and PDCD1.

PMCID: PMC3658200
PMID: 23073310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Dev Psychopathol. 2012 Nov;24(4):1335-44. doi: 10.1017/S0954579412000740.

Genomic structural variation in psychiatric disorders.

Rucker JJ(1), McGuffin P.

Author information: 
(1)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Kings College London, UK. james.rucker@kcl.ac.uk

Copy number variants (CNVs) are submicroscopic deletions and duplications of
genomic material that were previously thought to be rare phenomena. They have now
been robustly associated with a variety of disorders such as autism,
schizophrenia, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder through an emerging
research base in affective disorders. A complex picture is emerging of a
polygenic, heterogeneous model of disease, with CNVs conferring broad
susceptibility to a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders, rather than specific
disorders per se. Although the insights gleaned thus far only represent a small
piece of a much larger puzzle, progress has been rapid and new technologies
promise even more insights into these hitherto opaque brain disorders. We will
discuss CNVs, the current state of evidence for their role in the pathogenesis of
classical psychiatric disorders, and the application of such knowledge in
clinical settings.

PMID: 23062301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Psychopathol. 2012 Nov;24(4):1319-34. doi: 10.1017/S0954579412000739.

Developmental psychopathology: the role of structural variation in the genome.

Gill M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. mgill@tcd.ie

A wide range of developmental disorders present with characteristic
psychopathologies and behaviors, with diagnoses including, inter alia, cognitive 
disorders and learning disabilities, epilepsies, autism, and schizophrenia. Each,
to varying extent, has a genetic component to etiology and is associated with
cytogenetic abnormalities. Technological developments, particularly array-based
comparative genome hybridization and single nucleotide polymorphism chips, has
revealed a wide range of rare recurrent and de novo copy number variants (CNVs)
to be associated with disorder and psychopathology. It is surprising that many
apparently similar CNVs are identified across two or more disorders hitherto
considered unrelated. This article describes the characteristics of CNVs and
current technological restrictions that make accurately identifying small events 
difficult. It summarizes the latest discoveries for individual diagnostic
categories and considers the implications for a shared neurobiology. It examines 
likely developments in the knowledge base as well as addressing the clinical
implications going forward.

PMID: 23062300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Autism Res. 2012 Dec;5(6):385-97. doi: 10.1002/aur.1251. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

The expanding role of MBD genes in autism: identification of a MECP2 duplication 
and novel alterations in MBD5, MBD6, and SETDB1.

Cukier HN(1), Lee JM, Ma D, Young JI, Mayo V, Butler BL, Ramsook SS, Rantus JA,
Abrams AJ, Whitehead PL, Wright HH, Abramson RK, Haines JL, Cuccaro ML,
Pericak-Vance MA, Gilbert JR.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

The methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) gene family was first linked to autism over a
decade ago when Rett syndrome, which falls under the umbrella of autism spectrum 
disorders (ASDs), was revealed to be predominantly caused by MECP2 mutations.
Since that time, MECP2 alterations have been recognized in idiopathic ASD
patients by us and others. Individuals with deletions across the MBD5 gene also
present with ASDs, impaired speech, intellectual difficulties, repetitive
behaviors, and epilepsy. These findings suggest that further investigations of
the MBD gene family may reveal additional associations related to autism. We now 
describe the first study evaluating individuals with ASD for rare variants in
four autosomal MBD family members, MBD5, MBD6, SETDB1, and SETDB2, and expand our
initial screening in the MECP2 gene. Each gene was sequenced over all coding
exons and evaluated for copy number variations in 287 patients with ASD and an
equal number of ethnically matched control individuals. We identified 186
alterations through sequencing, approximately half of which were novel (96
variants, 51.6%). We identified 17 ASD specific, nonsynonymous variants, four of 
which were concordant in multiplex families: MBD5 Tyr1269Cys, MBD6 Arg883Trp,
MECP2 Thr240Ser, and SETDB1 Pro1067del. Furthermore, a complex duplication
spanning of the MECP2 gene was identified in two brothers who presented with
developmental delay and intellectual disability. From our studies, we provide the
first examples of autistic patients carrying potentially detrimental alterations 
in MBD6 and SETDB1, thereby demonstrating that the MBD gene family potentially
plays a significant role in rare and private genetic causes of autism.

(c) 2012 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3528798
PMID: 23055267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Jun;21(6):620-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.219. Epub 2012 Oct 
3.

Application of custom-designed oligonucleotide array CGH in 145 patients with
autistic spectrum disorders.

Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik B(1), Kastory-Bronowska M, Bartnik M, Derwinska K,
Dymczak-Domini W, Szumbarska D, Ziemka E, Szczaluba K, Sykulski M, Gambin T,
Gambin A, Shaw CA, Mazurczak T, Obersztyn E, Bocian E, Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental 
disorders, including childhood autism, atypical autism, and Asperger syndrome,
with an estimated prevalence of 1.0-2.5% in the general population. ASDs have a
complex multifactorial etiology, with genetic causes being recognized in only
10-20% of cases. Recently, copy-number variants (CNVs) have been shown to
contribute to over 10% of ASD cases. We have applied a custom-designed
oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization with an exonic coverage
of over 1700 genes, including 221 genes known to cause autism and autism
candidate genes, in a cohort of 145 patients with ASDs. The patients were
classified according to ICD-10 standards and the Childhood Autism Rating Scale
protocol into three groups consisting of 45 individuals with and 69 individuals
without developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), and 31 patients, in 
whom DD/ID could not be excluded. In 12 patients, we have identified 16
copy-number changes, eight (5.5%) of which likely contribute to ASDs. In addition
to known recurrent CNVs such as deletions 15q11.2 (BP1-BP2) and 3q13.31
(including DRD3 and ZBTB20), and duplications 15q13.3 and 16p13.11, our analysis 
revealed two novel genes clinically relevant for ASDs: ARHGAP24 (4q21.23q21.3)
and SLC16A7 (12q14.1). Our results further confirm the diagnostic importance of
array CGH in detection of CNVs in patients with ASDs and demonstrate that CNVs
are an important cause of ASDs as a heterogeneous condition with a variety of
contributory genes.

PMCID: PMC3658201
PMID: 23032108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. N Engl J Med. 2012 Oct 4;367(14):1321-31. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1200395. Epub 2012
Sep 12.

Phenotypic heterogeneity of genomic disorders and rare copy-number variants.

Girirajan S(1), Rosenfeld JA, Coe BP, Parikh S, Friedman N, Goldstein A, Filipink
RA, McConnell JS, Angle B, Meschino WS, Nezarati MM, Asamoah A, Jackson KE,
Gowans GC, Martin JA, Carmany EP, Stockton DW, Schnur RE, Penney LS, Martin DM,
Raskin S, Leppig K, Thiese H, Smith R, Aberg E, Niyazov DM, Escobar LF,
El-Khechen D, Johnson KD, Lebel RR, Siefkas K, Ball S, Shur N, McGuire M,
Brasington CK, Spence JE, Martin LS, Clericuzio C, Ballif BC, Shaffer LG, Eichler
EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Dec 13;367(24):2362.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Oct 4;367(14):1350-2.

BACKGROUND: Some copy-number variants are associated with genomic disorders with 
extreme phenotypic heterogeneity. The cause of this variation is unknown, which
presents challenges in genetic diagnosis, counseling, and management.
METHODS: We analyzed the genomes of 2312 children known to carry a copy-number
variant associated with intellectual disability and congenital abnormalities,
using array comparative genomic hybridization.
RESULTS: Among the affected children, 10.1% carried a second large copy-number
variant in addition to the primary genetic lesion. We identified seven genomic
disorders, each defined by a specific copy-number variant, in which the affected 
children were more likely to carry multiple copy-number variants than were
controls. We found that syndromic disorders could be distinguished from those
with extreme phenotypic heterogeneity on the basis of the total number of
copy-number variants and whether the variants are inherited or de novo. Children 
who carried two large copy-number variants of unknown clinical significance were 
eight times as likely to have developmental delay as were controls (odds ratio,
8.16; 95% confidence interval, 5.33 to 13.07; P=2.11x10(-38)). Among affected
children, inherited copy-number variants tended to co-occur with a second-site
large copy-number variant (Spearman correlation coefficient, 0.66; P<0.001). Boys
were more likely than girls to have disorders of phenotypic heterogeneity
(P<0.001), and mothers were more likely than fathers to transmit second-site
copy-number variants to their offspring (P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple, large copy-number variants, including those of unknown
pathogenic significance, compound to result in a severe clinical presentation,
and secondary copy-number variants are preferentially transmitted from maternal
carriers. (Funded by the Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative and the
National Institutes of Health.).

PMCID: PMC3494411
PMID: 22970919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2012 Oct;53(8):589-98. doi: 10.1002/em.21722. Epub 2012 Aug 
29.

Levels of select PCB and PBDE congeners in human postmortem brain reveal possible
environmental involvement in 15q11-q13 duplication autism spectrum disorder.

Mitchell MM(1), Woods R, Chi LH, Schmidt RJ, Pessah IN, Kostyniak PJ, LaSalle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis, California 95616, USA.

Persistent organic pollutants (POPs), including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) 
and polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs) that bioaccumulate in lipid-rich
tissues are of concern as developmental neurotoxicants. Epigenetic mechanisms
such as DNA methylation act at the interface of genetic and environmental factors
implicated in autism-spectrum disorders. The relationship between POP levels and 
DNA methylation patterns in individuals with and without neurodevelopmental
disorders has not been previously investigated. In this study, a total of 107
human frozen postmortem brain samples were analyzed for eight PCBs and seven
PBDEs by GC-micro electron capture detector and GC/MS using negative chemical
ionization. Human brain samples were grouped as neurotypical controls (n = 43),
neurodevelopmental disorders with known genetic basis (n = 32, including Down,
Rett, Prader-Willi, Angelman, and 15q11-q13 duplication syndromes), and autism of
unknown etiology (n = 32). Unexpectedly, PCB 95 was significantly higher in the
genetic neurodevelopmental group, but not idiopathic autism, as compared to
neurotypical controls. Interestingly, samples with detectable PCB 95 levels were 
almost exclusively those with maternal 15q11-q13 duplication (Dup15q) or deletion
in Prader-Willi syndrome. When sorted by birth year, Dup15q samples represented
five out of six of genetic neurodevelopmental samples born after the 1976 PCB ban
exhibiting detectable PCB 95 levels. Dup15q was the strongest predictor of PCB 95
exposure over age, gender, or year of birth. Dup15q brain showed lower levels of 
repetitive DNA methylation measured by LINE-1 pyrosequencing, but methylation
levels were confounded by year of birth. These results demonstrate a novel
paradigm by which specific POPs may predispose to genetic copy number variation
of 15q11-q13.

Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3739306
PMID: 22930557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Aug 21;13:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-75.

A case report of Chinese brothers with inherited MECP2-containing duplication:
autism and intellectual disability, but not seizures or respiratory infections.

Xu X(1), Xu Q, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Cheng T, Wu B, Ding Y, Lu P, Zheng J, Zhang M,
Qiu Z, Yu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Healthcare, Children's Hospital of Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. xuxiu@shmu.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Autistic spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a family of neurodevelopmental
disorders with strong genetic components. Recent studies have shown that copy
number variations in dosage sensitive genes can contribute significantly to these
disorders. One such gene is the transcription factor MECP2, whose loss of
function in females results in Rett syndrome, while its duplication in males
results in developmental delay and autism.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we identified a Chinese family with two brothers both
inheriting a 2.2 Mb MECP2-containing duplication (151,369,305 - 153,589,577) from
their mother. In addition, both brothers also had a 213.7 kb duplication on
Chromosome 2, inherited from their father. The older brother also carried a 48.4 
kb duplication on Chromosome 2 inherited from the mother, and a 8.2 kb deletion
at 11q13.5 inherited from the father. Based on the published literature, MECP2 is
the most autism-associated gene among the identified CNVs. Consistently, the boys
displayed clinical features in common with other patients carrying MECP2
duplications, including intellectual disability, autism, lack of speech, slight
hypotonia and unsteadiness of movement. They also had slight dysmorphic features 
including a depressed nose bridge, large ears and midface hypoplasia.
Interestingly, they did not exhibit other clinical features commonly observed in 
American-European patients with MECP2 duplication, including recurrent
respiratory infections and epilepsy.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first identification and
characterization of Chinese Han patients with MECP2-containing duplications.
Further cases are required to determine if the above described clinical
differences are due to individual variations or related to the genetic background
of the patients.

PMCID: PMC3506511
PMID: 22909152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2557-63. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35549. Epub 2012
Aug 17.

De novo interstitial duplication of 15q11.2-q13.1 with complex maternal
uniparental trisomy for the 15q11-q13 region in a patient with Prader-Willi
syndrome.

Burrage LC(1), Person RE, Flores A, Villanos MT, Bi W, Wiszniewska J, Bacino CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Prader-Willi syndrome is caused by the lack of paternal contribution for the
imprinted 15q11-q13 region that originates through a number of mechanisms such as
paternal deletion of 15q11-q13, maternal uniparental disomy, or by an imprinting 
defect due to epimutations in the paternal imprinting center. In the present
report, we describe a female patient with complex maternal uniparental trisomy
for the 15q11-q13 Prader-Willi syndrome critical region due to a de novo
interstitial duplication of 15q11-q13 region that is present in one of the
maternal homologs. As a result, the patient has three maternally derived copies
of the Prader-Willi syndrome critical region and absence of paternal 15
contribution and thus, presents with a Prader-Willi syndrome phenotype with risk 
for developing additional phenotypes (e.g., autism and psychiatric phenotypes)
characteristic of maternally derived duplications of this region. We suggest that
this is a rather unique mechanism leading to Prader-Willi syndrome that has not
been previously reported.

Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22903639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Neural Plast. 2012;2012:589524. doi: 10.1155/2012/589524. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Animal models of psychiatric disorders that reflect human copy number variation.

Nomura J(1), Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Integrative Bioscience, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

The development of genetic technologies has led to the identification of several 
copy number variations (CNVs) in the human genome. Genome rearrangements affect
dosage-sensitive gene expression in normal brain development. There is strong
evidence associating human psychiatric disorders, especially autism spectrum
disorders (ASDs) and schizophrenia to genetic risk factors and accumulated CNV
risk loci. Deletions in 1q21, 3q29, 15q13, 17p12, and 22q11, as well as
duplications in 16p11, 16p13, and 15q11-13 have been reported as recurrent CNVs
in ASD and/or schizophrenia. Chromosome engineering can be a useful technology to
reflect human diseases in animal models, especially CNV-based psychiatric
disorders. This system, based on the Cre/loxP strategy, uses large chromosome
rearrangement such as deletion, duplication, inversion, and translocation.
Although it is hard to reflect human pathophysiology in animal models, some
aspects of molecular pathways, brain anatomy, cognitive, and behavioral
phenotypes can be addressed. Some groups have created animal models of
psychiatric disorders, ASD, and schizophrenia, which are based on human CNV.
These mouse models display some brain anatomical and behavioral abnormalities,
providing insight into human neuropsychiatric disorders that will contribute to
novel drug screening for these devastating disorders.

PMCID: PMC3414062
PMID: 22900207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42422. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042422. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Haploinsufficiency of Cyfip1 produces fragile X-like phenotypes in mice.

Bozdagi O(1), Sakurai T, Dorr N, Pilorge M, Takahashi N, Buxbaum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Copy number variation (CNV) at the 15q11.2 region, which includes a
gene that codes for CYFIP1 (cytoplasmic FMR1 interacting protein 1), has been
implicated in autism, intellectual disability and additional neuropsychiatric
phenotypes. In the current study we studied the function of Cyfip1 in synaptic
physiology and behavior, using mice with a disruption of the Cyfip1 gene.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We observed that in Cyfip1 heterozygous mice
metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR)-dependent long-term depression (LTD)
induced by paired-pulse low frequency stimulation (PP-LFS) was significantly
increased in comparison to wildtype mice. In addition, mGluR-LTD was not affected
in the presence of protein synthesis inhibitor in the Cyfip1 heterozygous mice,
while the same treatment inhibited LTD in wildtype littermate controls.
mGluR-agonist (RS)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG)-induced LTD was also
significantly increased in hippocampal slices from Cyfip1 heterozygous mice and
again showed independence from protein synthesis only in the heterozygous
animals. Furthermore, we observed that the mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR)
inhibitor rapamycin was only effective at reducing mGluR-LTD in wildtype animals.
Behaviorally, Cyfip1 heterozygous mice showed enhanced extinction of inhibitory
avoidance. Application of both mGluR5 and mGluR1 antagonist to slices from Cyfip1
heterozygous mice reversed the increase in DHPG-induced LTD in these mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results demonstrate that haploinsufficiency of
Cyfip1 mimics key aspects of the phenotype of Fmr1 knockout mice and are
consistent with the hypothesis that these effects are mediated by interaction of 
Cyfip1 and Fmrp in regulating activity-dependent translation. The data provide
support for a model where CYFIP1 haploinsufficiency in patients results in
intermediate phenotypes increasing risk for neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC3416859
PMID: 22900020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hum Genet. 2012 Dec;131(12):1895-910. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1216-9. Epub 2012
Aug 14.

Human subtelomeric copy number gains suggest a DNA replication mechanism for
formation: beyond breakage-fusion-bridge for telomere stabilization.

Yatsenko SA(1), Hixson P, Roney EK, Scott DA, Schaaf CP, Ng YT, Palmer R, Fisher 
RB, Patel A, Cheung SW, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Room 604B, Houston, TX 77030, USA. yatsenkosa@mail.magee.edu

Constitutional deletions of distal 9q34 encompassing the EHMT1 (euchromatic
histone methyltransferase 1) gene, or loss-of-function point mutations in EHMT1, 
are associated with the 9q34.3 microdeletion syndrome, also known as Kleefstra
syndrome [MIM#610253]. We now report further evidence for genomic instability of 
the subtelomeric 9q34.3 region as evidenced by copy number gains of this genomic 
interval that include duplications, triplications, derivative chromosomes and
complex rearrangements. Comparisons between the observed shared clinical features
and molecular analyses in 20 subjects suggest that increased dosage of EHMT1 may 
be responsible for the neurodevelopmental impairment, speech delay, and autism
spectrum disorders revealing the dosage sensitivity of yet another chromatin
remodeling protein in human disease. Five patients had 9q34 genomic abnormalities
resulting in complex deletion-duplication or duplication-triplication
rearrangements; such complex triplications were also observed in six other
subtelomeric intervals. Based on the specific structure of these complex genomic 
rearrangements (CGR) a DNA replication mechanism is proposed confirming recent
findings in Caenorhabditis elegans telomere healing. The end-replication
challenges of subtelomeric genomic intervals may make them particularly prone to 
rearrangements generated by errors in DNA replication.

PMCID: PMC3493700
PMID: 22890305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012 Nov;36(10):2206-13. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.07.008. Epub 2012 Aug 4.

Potential opposite roles of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
pathway in autism spectrum and bipolar disorders.

Kalkman HO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Department, Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research, Building
386-14.22.15, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. hans.kalkman@novartis.com

Signal transduction from the synapse to the nucleus subsequently involves
transient increases in synaptic Ca2+, activation of CaM kinases, activation of
the GTPase Ras, activation of the ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway,
and finally GSK3 inhibition and CREB-activation. Genetic studies in autism have
identified mutations and copy number variations in a number of genes involved in 
this synapse to nucleus signaling path. In particular, a gain of function
mutation in the CACNA1C gene, deletions and disruption of the SYNGAP1 gene, a
copy number variation encompassing the MAPK3 gene and a duplication of YWHAE
indicate that in a subset of autism patients the ERK cascade is inappropriately
activated. Predicted functional consequences of this hyperactivation would be an 
increase in complexity of the dendritic tree, and via inhibition of GSK3, a
delayed circadian phase. The latter effect indeed fits the frequent sleep
disturbances observed in autistic patients. Interestingly, the sleep disturbances
in bipolar disorder patients are frequently characterized as phase advanced. A
selective evaluation of genetic mutations in bipolar patients indicates that the 
activity of the ERK cascade, at least in a subset of patients, presumably is
hypoactive. Thus, with respect to the ERK pathway, autism and bipolar disorder
seem each other's counter pole.

Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22884480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Mar;21(3):343-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.157. Epub 2012 Aug 
8.

Detection of copy-number variation in AUTS2 gene by targeted exonic array CGH in 
patients with developmental delay and autistic spectrum disorders.

Nagamani SC(1), Erez A, Ben-Zeev B, Frydman M, Winter S, Zeller R, El-Khechen D, 
Escobar L, Stankiewicz P, Patel A, Cheung SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Small genomic rearrangements and copy-number variations (CNVs) involving a single
gene have been associated recently with many neurocognitive phenotypes, including
intellectual disability (ID), behavioral abnormalities, and autistic spectrum
disorders (ASDs). Such small CNVs in the Autism susceptibility candidate 2
(AUTS2) gene have been shown to be associated with seizures, ID, and ASDs. We
report four patients with small CNVs ranging in size between 133-319 kb that
disrupt AUTS2. Two patients have duplications involving single exons, whereas two
have deletions that removed multiple exons. All patients had developmental delay,
whereas two patients had a diagnosis of ASDs. The CNVs were detected by an
exon-targeted array CGH with dense oligonucleotide coverage in exons of genes
known or hypothesized to be causative of multiple human phenotypes. Our report
further shows that disruption of AUTS2 results in a variety of neurobehavioral
phenotypes. More importantly, it demonstrates the utility of targeted exon array 
as a highly sensitive clinical diagnostic tool for the detection of small genomic
rearrangements in the clinically relevant regions of the human genome.

PMCID: PMC3573196
PMID: 22872102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Feb;21(2):182-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.144. Epub 2012 Jul 
25.

16p11.2-p12.2 duplication syndrome; a genomic condition differentiated from
euchromatic variation of 16p11.2.

Barber JC(1), Hall V, Maloney VK, Huang S, Roberts AM, Brady AF, Foulds N, Bewes 
B, Volleth M, Liehr T, Mehnert K, Bateman M, White H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, Hampshire, 
UK. john.barber@soton.ac.uk

Chromosome 16 contains multiple copy number variations (CNVs) that predispose to 
genomic disorders. Here, we differentiate pathogenic duplications of
16p11.2-p12.2 from microscopically similar euchromatic variants of 16p11.2.
Patient 1 was a girl of 18 with autism, moderate intellectual disability,
behavioural difficulties, dysmorphic features and a 7.71-Mb (megabase pair)
duplication (16:21 521 005-29 233 146). Patient 2 had a 7.81-Mb duplication
(16:21 382 561-29 191 527), speech delay and obsessional behaviour as a boy and, 
as an adult, short stature, macrocephaly and mild dysmorphism. The duplications
contain 65 coding genes of which Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) has the highest
likelihood of being haploinsufficient and, by implication, a triplosensitive
gene. An additional 1.11-Mb CNV of 10q11.21 in Patient 1 was a possible modifier 
containing the G-protein-regulated inducer of neurite growth 2 (GPRIN2) gene. In 
contrast, the euchromatic variants in Patients 3 and 4 were amplifications from a
945-kb region containing non-functional immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGHV), hect
domain pseudogene (HERC2P4) and TP53-inducible target gene 3 (TP53TG3) loci in
proximal 16p11.2 (16:31 953 353-32 898 635). Paralogous pyrosequencing gave a
total copy number of 3-8 in controls and 8 to >10 in Patients 3 and 4. The
16p11.2-p12.2 duplication syndrome is a recurrent genomic disorder with a
variable phenotype including developmental delay, dysmorphic features, mild to
severe intellectual disability, autism, obsessive or stereotyped behaviour, short
stature and anomalies of the hands and fingers. It is important to differentiate 
pathogenic 16p11.2-p12.2 duplications from harmless, microscopically similar
euchromatic variants of proximal 16p11.2, especially at prenatal diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3548261
PMID: 22828807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Oct;159B(7):760-71. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32081. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Application of array comparative genomic hybridization in 102 patients with
epilepsy and additional neurodevelopmental disorders.

Bartnik M(1), Szczepanik E, Derwinska K, Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik B, Gambin T,
Sykulski M, Ziemkiewicz K, Kedzior M, Gos M, Hoffman-Zacharska D, Mazurczak T,
Jeziorek A, Antczak-Marach D, Rudzka-Dybala M, Mazurkiewicz H,
Goszczanska-Ciuchta A, Zalewska-Miszkurka Z, Terczynska I, Sobierajewicz M, Shaw 
CA, Gambin A, Mierzewska H, Mazurczak T, Obersztyn E, Bocian E, Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

Copy-number variants (CNVs) collectively represent an important cause of
neurodevelopmental disorders such as developmental delay (DD)/intellectual
disability (ID), autism, and epilepsy. In contrast to DD/ID, for which the
application of microarray techniques enables detection of pathogenic CNVs in
-10-20% of patients, there are only few studies of the role of CNVs in epilepsy
and genetic etiology in the vast majority of cases remains unknown. We have
applied whole-genome exon-targeted oligonucleotide array comparative genomic
hybridization (array CGH) to a cohort of 102 patients with various types of
epilepsy with or without additional neurodevelopmental abnormalities. Chromosomal
microarray analysis revealed 24 non-polymorphic CNVs in 23 patients, among which 
10 CNVs are known to be clinically relevant. Two rare deletions in 2q24.1q24.3,
including KCNJ3 and 9q21.13 are novel pathogenic genetic loci and 12 CNVs are of 
unknown clinical significance. Our results further support the notion that rare
CNVs can cause different types of epilepsy, emphasize the efficiency of detecting
novel candidate genes by whole-genome array CGH, and suggest that the clinical
application of array CGH should be extended to patients with unexplained
epilepsies.

2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc

PMID: 22825934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Apr;2(6):245-250. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

A 380-kb Duplication in 7p22.3 Encompassing the LFNG Gene in a Boy with Asperger 
Syndrome.

Vulto-van Silfhout AT(1), de Brouwer AF, de Leeuw N, Obihara CC, Brunner HG, de
Vries BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

De novo genomic aberrations are considered an important cause of autism spectrum 
disorders. We describe a de novo 380-kb gain in band p22.3 of chromosome 7 in a
patient with Asperger syndrome. This duplicated region contains 9 genes including
the LNFG gene that is an important regulator of NOTCH signaling. We suggest that 
this copy number variation has been a contributive factor to the occurrence of
Asperger syndrome in this patient.

PMCID: PMC3362183
PMID: 22822384  [PubMed]


27. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Aug;40(4):672-6. doi: 10.1042/BST20120045.

Copy number variations involving the microtubule-associated protein tau in human 
diseases.

Rovelet-Lecrux A(1), Campion D.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1079, Rouen, France. anne.roveletlecrux@univrouen.fr

Mutations of the MAPT (microtubule-associated protein tau) gene are associated
with FTLD (frontotemporal lobar degeneration) with tau pathology. These mutations
result in a decreased ability of tau to bind MTs (microtubules), an increased
production of tau with four MT-binding repeats or enhanced tau aggregation. In
two FTLD patients, we recently described CNVs (copy number variations) affecting 
the MAPT gene, consisting of a partial deletion and a complete duplication of the
gene. The partial deletion resulted in a truncated protein lacking the first
MT-binding domain, which had a dramatic decrease in the binding to MTs but
acquired the ability to bind MAP (microtubule-associated protein) 1-B. In this
case, tauopathy probably resulted from both a loss of normal function and a gain 
of function by which truncated tau would sequester another MAP. In the other FTLD
patient, the complete duplication might result in the overexpression of tau,
which in the mouse model induces axonopathy and tau aggregates reminiscent of
FTLD-tau pathology. Interestingly, the same rearrangement was also described in
several children with mental retardation, autism spectrum disorders and
dysmorphic features, as well as in a schizophrenic patient. Finally, complete
deletions of the MAPT gene have been associated with mental retardation,
hypotonia and facial dysmorphism.

PMID: 22817714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 15;72(8):651-4. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.06.014.
Epub 2012 Jul 15.

Analysis of copy number variations in brain DNA from patients with schizophrenia 
and other psychiatric disorders.

Ye T(1), Lipska BK, Tao R, Hyde TM, Wang L, Li C, Choi KH, Straub RE, Kleinman
JE, Weinberger DR.

Author information: 
(1)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins University Medical
Campus, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Clinical studies have identified several regions of the genome with
copy number variations (CNVs) associated with diverse neurodevelopmental
behavioral disorders.
METHODS: We analyzed 1 million (M) single nucleotide polymorphism genotype arrays
for evidence of previously reported recurrent CNVs and enriched genome-wide CNV
burden in DNA from 600 brains, including 441 individuals with various psychiatric
diagnoses. We explored gene expression in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in
selected cases with CNVs and in other subjects with Illumina BeadArrays (568
subjects in total) and additionally in 66-92 subjects with quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The CNVs in previously reported genomic regions were identified in 4 of 
193 patients with the diagnosis of schizophrenia (1q21.1, 11q25, 15q11.2, 22q11),
4 of 238 patients with mood disorders (11q25, 15q11.2, 22q11), and 1 of 10
patients with autism (2p16.3). No evidence of increased genome-wide CNV burden
was observed in cases with schizophrenia or mood disorders, although the study is
underpowered to observe rare events. Messenger RNA expression patterns suggested 
incomplete molecular penetrance of observed CNVs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm in brain DNA the presence of certain recurrent CNVs
in a small percentage of patients with psychiatric diagnoses.

Copyright (c) 2012 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3456994
PMID: 22795968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;Chapter 8:Unit8.12. doi:
10.1002/0471142905.hg0812s74.

Oligonucleotide microarrays for clinical diagnosis of copy number variation and
zygosity status.

Miller DT(1), Shen Y, Wu BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Genetics, Children's Hospital
Boston, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Detection of submicroscopic genomic copy number variation is now considered the
first-tier clinical test-in place of standard G-banded karyotyping-in the
evaluation of children with unexplained developmental delay, intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorders, or congenital anomalies. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) was the first molecular method for detection of
submicroscopic genomic copy number variants (CNVs), but microarray-based
comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) has a much higher diagnostic yield 
for these patients when compared to traditional cytogenetic methods such as
karyotype and FISH. This unit focuses on oligonucleotide arrays, including
updated information about detection of long contiguous stretches of homozygosity 
(LCSH) through inclusion of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) probes. Most
clinical laboratories now offer arrays with some level of probe coverage
throughout the genome, and many are offering detection of LCSH. Updated
guidelines for array design and result interpretation are reviewed.

(c) 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 22786613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Sep;159B(6):710-7. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32074. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Identification of two inherited copy number variants in a male with autism
supports two-hit and compound heterozygosity models of autism.

Gau SS(1), Liao HM, Hong CC, Chien WH, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. gaushufe@ntu.edu.tw

Autism is a childhood-onset neurodevelopmental disorder with complex genetic
mechanism underlying its etiology. Recent studies revealed that a few single de
novo copy number variants of genomic DNA (copy number variants [CNVs]) are
pathogenic and causal in some sporadic cases, adding support to the hypothesis
that some sporadic autism might be caused by single rare mutation with large
clinical effect. In this study, we report the detection of two novel private CNVs
simultaneously in a male patient with autism. These two CNVs include a
microduplication of ~4.5 Mb at chromosome 4q12-13.1 that was transmitted from his
mother and a microdeletion of ~1.8 Mb at 5q32 that was transmitted from his
father. Several genes such as LPHN3, POU4F3, SH3RF2, and TCERG1 mapped to these
two regions have psychiatric implications. However, the parents had only mild
degree of attention deficit symptoms but did not demonstrate any obvious autistic
symptoms or psychopathology. Our findings indicate that each of these two CNVs
alone may not be pathogenic enough to cause clinical symptoms in their respective
carriers, and hence they can be transmitted within each individual family.
However, concomitant presence of these two CNVs might result in the clinical
phenotypes of the affected patient reported here. Thus, our report of this family
may represent an example to show that two hits of CNV and the presence of
compound heterozygosity might be important mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis
of autism.

Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22778016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Medicina (B Aires). 2012;72(3):227-34.

[The etiology of schizophrenia].

[Article in Spanish]

Gejman PV(1), Sanders AR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Psychiatric Genetics, NorthShore University HealthSystem Research
Institute, Evanston, Illinois, USA. pgejman@uchicago.edu

Research conducted in recent years represents a new dawn of knowledge for the
risk factors of schizophrenia, and genome-wide approaches have revolutionized the
field of genetic mapping of schizophrenia. The aggregate genetic data
increasingly support a combination of rare and common genetic variation in
schizophrenia, a major role for polygenic inheritance, and a genetic overlap
(pleiotropy) of schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders, such as bipolar
disorder and autism. A main challenge for the field is the translation of
established genetic associations into a better pathophysiological understanding
of schizophrenia. The current and upcoming resequencing programs - both exomes
(all exons) and full genomes - and genome-wide transcriptional analyses will
allow a more thorough dissection of the molecular genetics of the disorder.

PMID: 22763160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul 13;91(1):38-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.011. Epub
2012 Jun 21.

Genome-wide transcriptome profiling reveals the functional impact of rare de novo
and recurrent CNVs in autism spectrum disorders.

Luo R(1), Sanders SJ, Tian Y, Voineagu I, Huang N, Chu SH, Klei L, Cai C, Ou J,
Lowe JK, Hurles ME, Devlin B, State MW, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

Copy-number variants (CNVs) are a major contributor to the pathophysiology of
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), but the functional impact of CNVs remains
largely unexplored. Because brain tissue is not available from most samples, we
interrogated gene expression in lymphoblasts from 244 families with discordant
siblings in the Simons Simplex Collection in order to identify potentially
pathogenic variation. Our results reveal that the overall frequency of
significantly misexpressed genes (which we refer to here as outliers) identified 
in probands and unaffected siblings does not differ. However, in probands, but
not their unaffected siblings, the group of outlier genes is significantly
enriched in neural-related pathways, including neuropeptide signaling,
synaptogenesis, and cell adhesion. We demonstrate that outlier genes cluster
within the most pathogenic CNVs (rare de novo CNVs) and can be used for the
prioritization of rare CNVs of potentially unknown significance. Several
nonrecurrent CNVs with significant gene-expression alterations are identified
(these include deletions in chromosomal regions 3q27, 3p13, and 3p26 and
duplications at 2p15), suggesting that these are potential candidate ASD loci. In
addition, we identify distinct expression changes in 16p11.2 microdeletions,
16p11.2 microduplications, and 7q11.23 duplications, and we show that specific
genes within the 16p CNV interval correlate with differences in head
circumference, an ASD-relevant phenotype. This study provides evidence that
pathogenic structural variants have a functional impact via transcriptome
alterations in ASDs at a genome-wide level and demonstrates the utility of
integrating gene expression with mutation data for the prioritization of genes
disrupted by potentially pathogenic mutations.

Copyright (c) 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3397271
PMID: 22726847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2012 Jun;12(5):449-57. doi: 10.1586/erm.12.40.

The clinical utility of molecular karyotyping using high-resolution
array-comparative genomic hybridization.

Tzetis M(1), Kitsiou-Tzeli S, Frysira H, Xaidara A, Kanavakis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Aghia Sophia Childrens Hospital, Thivon &
Levadias, Medical School, University of Athens, 11527, Athens, Greece.
mtzetis@med.uoa.gr

Clinical characteristics of patients are not always related to specific
syndromes. Array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is used to detect
submicroscopic copy number variants within the genome not visible by conventional
karyotyping. The clinical application of aCGH has helped the genetic diagnosis of
patients with unexplained developmental delay/intellectual disability, autism
spectrum disorders, with or without multiple congenital anomalies. Since 2008, we
have implemented aCGH with the 244K and 4 x 180K Agilent platform on 334 patients
with various degrees of developmental delay/intellectual disability, seizures,
autism spectrum disorders, multiple congenital anomalies and normal previous
conventional karyotype. Many of the patients had also received a variety of other
genetic tests (Fragile X syndrome, Rett syndrome, single FISH tests or metabolic 
screens), which were normal. Clinically significant submicroscopic imbalances
with aCGH were detected in 84 ([?]25.15%) patients. aCGH is proving to be a
powerful tool for the identification of novel chromosomal syndromes, thus
allowing accurate prognosis and phenotype-genotype correlations.

PMID: 22702362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Bioinformatics. 2012 Jun 15;28(12):i154-62. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts234.

DELISHUS: an efficient and exact algorithm for genome-wide detection of deletion 
polymorphism in autism.

Aguiar D(1), Halldorsson BV, Morrow EM, Istrail S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Center for Computational Molecular Biology,
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

MOTIVATION: The understanding of the genetic determinants of complex disease is
undergoing a paradigm shift. Genetic heterogeneity of rare mutations with
deleterious effects is more commonly being viewed as a major component of
disease. Autism is an excellent example where research is active in identifying
matches between the phenotypic and genomic heterogeneities. A considerable
portion of autism appears to be correlated with copy number variation, which is
not directly probed by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array or sequencing
technologies. Identifying the genetic heterogeneity of small deletions remains a 
major unresolved computational problem partly due to the inability of algorithms 
to detect them.
RESULTS: In this article, we present an algorithmic framework, which we term
DELISHUS, that implements three exact algorithms for inferring regions of
hemizygosity containing genomic deletions of all sizes and frequencies in SNP
genotype data. We implement an efficient backtracking algorithm-that processes a 
1 billion entry genome-wide association study SNP matrix in a few minutes-to
compute all inherited deletions in a dataset. We further extend our model to give
an efficient algorithm for detecting de novo deletions. Finally, given a set of
called deletions, we also give a polynomial time algorithm for computing the
critical regions of recurrent deletions. DELISHUS achieves significantly lower
false-positive rates and higher power than previously published algorithms partly
because it considers all individuals in the sample simultaneously. DELISHUS may
be applied to SNP array or sequencing data to identify the deletion spectrum for 
family-based association studies.
AVAILABILITY: DELISHUS is available at
http://www.brown.edu/Research/Istrail_Lab/.

PMCID: PMC3371866
PMID: 22689755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Schizophr Res. 2012 Aug;139(1-3):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.05.015. Epub 
2012 Jun 7.

Identification and characterization of three inherited genomic copy number
variations associated with familial schizophrenia.

Liao HM(1), Chao YL, Huang AL, Cheng MC, Chen YJ, Lee KF, Fang JS, Hsu CH, Chen
CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Graduate Program of Biotechnology in Medicine, 
National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Schizophrenia is a complex mental disorder with high degree of genetic influence 
in its etiology. Several recent studies revealed that copy number variations
(CNVs) of genomic DNA contributed significantly to the genetic architecture of
sporadic schizophrenia. This study aimed to investigate whether CNVs also
contribute to the familial forms of schizophrenia. Using array-based comparative 
genomic hybridization technology, we searched for pathogenic CNV associated with 
schizophrenia in a sample of 60 index cases from multiplex schizophrenia
families. We detected three inherited CNVs that were associated with
schizophrenia in three families, including a microdeletion of ~4.4Mb at
chromosome 6q12-q13, a microduplication of ~1Mb at chromosome 18q12.3, and an
interstitial duplication of ~5Mb at chromosome 15q11.2-q13.1. Our data indicate
that CNVs contribute to the genetic underpinnings of the familial forms of
schizophrenia as well as of the sporadic form. As 15q11-13 duplication is a
well-known recurrent CNV associated with autism in the literature, the detection 
of the 15q11.2-q13.1 duplication in our schizophrenia patients provides
additional support to other studies reporting that schizophrenia is part of the
clinical spectrum of 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome.

Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22682706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jul;158A(7):1654-61. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35396. Epub 2012 
Jun 7.

Rare inherited A2BP1 deletion in a proband with autism and developmental
hemiparesis.

Davis LK(1), Maltman N, Mosconi MW, Macmillan C, Schmitt L, Moore K, Francis SM, 
Jacob S, Sweeney JA, Cook EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA. lea.k.davis@gmail.com

Ataxin 2 binding protein 1 (A2BP1 aka FOX1, RBFOX1) is an RNA binding protein
responsible for regulation of pre-mRNA splicing events in a number of critical
developmental genes expressed in muscle, heart and neuronal cells [Shibata et al.
(2000); Mamm Genome 12:595-601; Jin et al. (2003); EMBO J 22:905-912; Underwood
et al. (2005); Mol Cell Biol 25:10005-10016]. Rare copy number abnormalities of
A2BP1 have been previously associated with cognitive impairment, attention
deficit disorder and autism [Martin et al. (2007); Am J Med Gen Part B
144B:869-876; Elia et al. (2010); Mol Psychiatry 15:637-646.]. Using a 1M
Illumina SNP microarray, we identified a 1.3 kb deletion in A2BP1, which was
subsequently validated by quantitative PCR. Here we present an in depth case
study of an individual with autism and mild developmental hemiparesis in whom the
deletion was detected. This study provides further support for the possible role 
of rare copy number variants in A2BP1 in the development of autism and associated
motor asymmetries.

Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3707293
PMID: 22678932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;29(3):266-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.03.004.

[Analysis of de novo copy number variations in a family affected with autism
spectrum disorders using high-resolution array-based comparative genomic
hybridization].

[Article in Chinese]

He WZ(1), Liu WQ, Zhong XQ, Chen XL, Li SY, Zhang HM, Li Q, Cui QL, Sun XF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Department of Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Third
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Key Laboratory for Major
Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine and Genetics, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510150, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze de novo copy number variations (CNVs) in a Chinese family
affected with autism spectrum disorders (ASD).
METHODS: Affymetrix Cytogenetics Whole Genome 2.7M Array assay was performed to
identify potential CNVs in four members from the family.
RESULTS: A total of 89 de novo CNV regions were identified in the autistic
siblings. The CNV regions in total have exceeded 1/1000 of the lengths of
chromosomes 5, 11 and 14. In addition, de novo CNV regions were also identified
at 3p26.1, 4q22.2, and 5p15.2, which encompassed 10 genes associated with nerve
development including GRM7, GRID2 and CTNND2.
CONCLUSION: A number of nerve development associated genes were at the de novo
CNV sites, which may provide new clues for genetic research of ASD.
High-resolution array-comparative genomic hybridization is an effective method
for detecting submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances.

PMID: 22678785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Dec;20(12):1240-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.95. Epub 2012 May
23.

Phenotypic spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations of NRXN1 exon deletions.

Schaaf CP(1), Boone PM, Sampath S, Williams C, Bader PI, Mueller JM, Shchelochkov
OA, Brown CW, Crawford HP, Phalen JA, Tartaglia NR, Evans P, Campbell WM, Tsai
AC, Parsley L, Grayson SW, Scheuerle A, Luzzi CD, Thomas SK, Eng PA, Kang SH,
Patel A, Stankiewicz P, Cheung SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Copy number variants (CNVs) and intragenic rearrangements of the NRXN1 (neurexin 
1) gene are associated with a wide spectrum of developmental and neuropsychiatric
disorders, including intellectual disability, speech delay, autism spectrum
disorders (ASDs), hypotonia and schizophrenia. We performed a detailed clinical
and molecular characterization of 24 patients who underwent clinical microarray
analysis and had intragenic deletions of NRXN1. Seventeen of these deletions
involved exons of NRXN1, whereas seven deleted intronic sequences only. The
patients with exonic deletions manifested developmental delay/intellectual
disability (93%), infantile hypotonia (59%) and ASDs (56%). Congenital
malformations and dysmorphic features appeared infrequently and inconsistently
among this population of patients with NRXN1 deletions. The more C-terminal
deletions, including those affecting the b isoform of neurexin 1, manifested
increased head size and a high frequency of seizure disorder (88%) when compared 
with N-terminal deletions of NRXN1.

PMCID: PMC3499754
PMID: 22617343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(5):e1002692. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002692. Epub 2012 May 
17.

Genomic hypomethylation in the human germline associates with selective
structural mutability in the human genome.

Li J(1), Harris RA, Cheung SW, Coarfa C, Jeong M, Goodell MA, White LD, Patel A, 
Kang SH, Shaw C, Chinault AC, Gambin T, Gambin A, Lupski JR, Milosavljevic A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Research Laboratory, Epigenome Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

The hotspots of structural polymorphisms and structural mutability in the human
genome remain to be explained mechanistically. We examine associations of
structural mutability with germline DNA methylation and with non-allelic
homologous recombination (NAHR) mediated by low-copy repeats (LCRs). Combined
evidence from four human sperm methylome maps, human genome evolution, structural
polymorphisms in the human population, and previous genomic and disease studies
consistently points to a strong association of germline hypomethylation and
genomic instability. Specifically, methylation deserts, the ~1% fraction of the
human genome with the lowest methylation in the germline, show a tenfold
enrichment for structural rearrangements that occurred in the human genome since 
the branching of chimpanzee and are highly enriched for fast-evolving loci that
regulate tissue-specific gene expression. Analysis of copy number variants (CNVs)
from 400 human samples identified using a custom-designed array comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH) chip, combined with publicly available structural
variation data, indicates that association of structural mutability with germline
hypomethylation is comparable in magnitude to the association of structural
mutability with LCR-mediated NAHR. Moreover, rare CNVs occurring in the genomes
of individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and developmental 
delay and de novo CNVs occurring in those diagnosed with autism are significantly
more concentrated within hypomethylated regions. These findings suggest a new
connection between the epigenome, selective mutability, evolution, and human
disease.

PMCID: PMC3355074
PMID: 22615578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nature. 2012 May 16;485(7398):363-7. doi: 10.1038/nature11091.

KCTD13 is a major driver of mirrored neuroanatomical phenotypes of the 16p11.2
copy number variant.

Golzio C(1), Willer J, Talkowski ME, Oh EC, Taniguchi Y, Jacquemont S, Reymond A,
Sun M, Sawa A, Gusella JF, Kamiya A, Beckmann JS, Katsanis N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Disease Modeling and Department of Cell biology, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 May 17;485(7398):318-9.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are major contributors to genetic disorders. We have 
dissected a region of the 16p11.2 chromosome--which encompasses 29 genes--that
confers susceptibility to neurocognitive defects when deleted or duplicated.
Overexpression of each human transcript in zebrafish embryos identified KCTD13 as
the sole message capable of inducing the microcephaly phenotype associated with
the 16p11.2 duplication, whereas suppression of the same locus yielded the
macrocephalic phenotype associated with the 16p11.2 deletion, capturing the
mirror phenotypes of humans. Analyses of zebrafish and mouse embryos suggest that
microcephaly is caused by decreased proliferation of neuronal progenitors with
concomitant increase in apoptosis in the developing brain, whereas macrocephaly
arises by increased proliferation and no changes in apoptosis. A role for KCTD13 
dosage changes is consistent with autism in both a recently reported family with 
a reduced 16p11.2 deletion and a subject reported here with a complex 16p11.2
rearrangement involving de novo structural alteration of KCTD13. Our data suggest
that KCTD13 is a major driver for the neurodevelopmental phenotypes associated
with the 16p11.2 CNV, reinforce the idea that one or a small number of
transcripts within a CNV can underpin clinical phenotypes, and offer an efficient
route to identifying dosage-sensitive loci.

PMCID: PMC3366115
PMID: 22596160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genome Res. 2012 Aug;22(8):1525-32. doi: 10.1101/gr.138115.112. Epub 2012 May 14.

Copy number variation detection and genotyping from exome sequence data.

Krumm N(1), Sudmant PH, Ko A, O'Roak BJ, Malig M, Coe BP; NHLBI Exome Sequencing 
Project, Quinlan AR, Nickerson DA, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

While exome sequencing is readily amenable to single-nucleotide variant
discovery, the sparse and nonuniform nature of the exome capture reaction has
hindered exome-based detection and characterization of genic copy number
variation. We developed a novel method using singular value decomposition (SVD)
normalization to discover rare genic copy number variants (CNVs) as well as
genotype copy number polymorphic (CNP) loci with high sensitivity and specificity
from exome sequencing data. We estimate the precision of our algorithm using 122 
trios (366 exomes) and show that this method can be used to reliably predict (94%
overall precision) both de novo and inherited rare CNVs involving three or more
consecutive exons. We demonstrate that exome-based genotyping of CNPs strongly
correlates with whole-genome data (median r(2) = 0.91), especially for loci with 
fewer than eight copies, and can estimate the absolute copy number of
multi-allelic genes with high accuracy (78% call level). The resulting
user-friendly computational pipeline, CoNIFER (copy number inference from exome
reads), can reliably be used to discover disruptive genic CNVs missed by standard
approaches and should have broad application in human genetic studies of disease.

PMCID: PMC3409265
PMID: 22585873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Nov;20(11):1141-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.73. Epub 2012 May
2.

CNVs leading to fusion transcripts in individuals with autism spectrum disorder.

Holt R(1), Sykes NH, Conceicao IC, Cazier JB, Anney RJ, Oliveira G, Gallagher L, 
Vicente A, Monaco AP, Pagnamenta AT.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

There is strong evidence that rare copy number variants (CNVs) have a role in
susceptibility to autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Much research has focused on 
how CNVs mediate a phenotypic effect by altering gene expression levels. We
investigated an alternative mechanism whereby CNVs combine the 5' and 3' ends of 
two genes, creating a 'fusion gene'. Any resulting mRNA with an open reading
frame could potentially alter the phenotype via a gain-of-function mechanism. We 
examined 2382 and 3096 rare CNVs from 996 individuals with ASD and 1287 controls,
respectively, for potential to generate fusion transcripts. There was no
increased burden in individuals with ASD; 122/996 cases harbored at least one
rare CNV of this type, compared with 179/1287 controls (P=0.89). There was also
no difference in the overall frequency distribution between cases and controls.
We examined specific examples of such CNVs nominated by case-control analysis and
a candidate approach. Accordingly, a duplication involving REEP1-POLR1A (found in
3/996 cases and 0/1287 controls) and a single occurrence CNV involving
KIAA0319-TDP2 were tested. However, no fusion transcripts were detected by
RT-PCR. Analysis of additional samples based on cell line availability resulted
in validation of a MAPKAPK5-ACAD10 fusion transcript in two probands. However,
this variant was present in controls at a similar rate and is unlikely to
influence ASD susceptibility. In summary, although we find no evidence that
fusion-gene generating CNVs lead to ASD susceptibility, discovery of a
MAPKAPK5-ACAD10 transcript with an estimated frequency of ~1/200 suggests that
gain-of-function mechanisms should be considered in future CNVs studies.

PMCID: PMC3476715
PMID: 22549408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Aug 1;21(15):3513-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds164. Epub 2012 Apr 
27.

Evaluation of copy number variations reveals novel candidate genes in autism
spectrum disorder-associated pathways.

Griswold AJ(1), Ma D, Cukier HN, Nations LD, Schmidt MA, Chung RH, Jaworski JM,
Salyakina D, Konidari I, Whitehead PL, Wright HH, Abramson RK, Williams SM, Menon
R, Martin ER, Haines JL, Gilbert JR, Cuccaro ML, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are highly heritable, yet relatively few
associated genetic loci have been replicated. Copy number variations (CNVs) have 
been implicated in autism; however, the majority of loci contribute to <1% of the
disease population. Therefore, independent studies are important to refine
associated CNV regions and discover novel susceptibility genes. In this study, a 
genome-wide SNP array was utilized for CNV detection by two distinct algorithms
in a European ancestry case-control data set. We identify a significantly higher 
burden in the number and size of deletions, and disrupting more genes in ASD
cases. Moreover, 18 deletions larger than 1 Mb were detected exclusively in
cases, implicating novel regions at 2q22.1, 3p26.3, 4q12 and 14q23. Case-specific
CNVs provided further evidence for pathways previously implicated in ASDs,
revealing new candidate genes within the GABAergic signaling and neural
development pathways. These include DBI, an allosteric binder of GABA receptors, 
GABARAPL1, the GABA receptor-associated protein, and SLC6A11, a postsynaptic GABA
transporter. We also identified CNVs in COBL, deletions of which cause defects in
neuronal cytoskeleton morphogenesis in model vertebrates, and DNER, a
neuron-specific Notch ligand required for cerebellar development. Moreover, we
found evidence of genetic overlap between ASDs and other neurodevelopmental and
neuropsychiatric diseases. These genes include glutamate receptors (GRID1, GRIK2 
and GRIK4), synaptic regulators (NRXN3, SLC6A8 and SYN3), transcription factor
(ZNF804A) and RNA-binding protein FMR1. Taken together, these CNVs may be a few
of the missing pieces of ASD heritability and lead to discovering novel
etiological mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3392110
PMID: 22543975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cell. 2012 Apr 27;149(3):525-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.028. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Sequencing chromosomal abnormalities reveals neurodevelopmental loci that confer 
risk across diagnostic boundaries.

Talkowski ME(1), Rosenfeld JA, Blumenthal I, Pillalamarri V, Chiang C, Heilbut A,
Ernst C, Hanscom C, Rossin E, Lindgren AM, Pereira S, Ruderfer D, Kirby A, Ripke 
S, Harris DJ, Lee JH, Ha K, Kim HG, Solomon BD, Gropman AL, Lucente D, Sims K,
Ohsumi TK, Borowsky ML, Loranger S, Quade B, Lage K, Miles J, Wu BL, Shen Y,
Neale B, Shaffer LG, Daly MJ, Morton CC, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.

Balanced chromosomal abnormalities (BCAs) represent a relatively untapped
reservoir of single-gene disruptions in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). We
sequenced BCAs in patients with autism or related NDDs, revealing disruption of
33 loci in four general categories: (1) genes previously associated with abnormal
neurodevelopment (e.g., AUTS2, FOXP1, and CDKL5), (2) single-gene contributors to
microdeletion syndromes (MBD5, SATB2, EHMT1, and SNURF-SNRPN), (3) novel risk
loci (e.g., CHD8, KIRREL3, and ZNF507), and (4) genes associated with later-onset
psychiatric disorders (e.g., TCF4, ZNF804A, PDE10A, GRIN2B, and ANK3). We also
discovered among neurodevelopmental cases a profoundly increased burden of
copy-number variants from these 33 loci and a significant enrichment of polygenic
risk alleles from genome-wide association studies of autism and schizophrenia.
Our findings suggest a polygenic risk model of autism and reveal that some
neurodevelopmental genes are sensitive to perturbation by multiple mutational
mechanisms, leading to variable phenotypic outcomes that manifest at different
life stages.

Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3340505
PMID: 22521361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 May 4;90(5):879-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.03.017. Epub
2012 Apr 12.

SHANK1 Deletions in Males with Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Sato D(1), Lionel AC, Leblond CS, Prasad A, Pinto D, Walker S, O'Connor I,
Russell C, Drmic IE, Hamdan FF, Michaud JL, Endris V, Roeth R, Delorme R, Huguet 
G, Leboyer M, Rastam M, Gillberg C, Lathrop M, Stavropoulos DJ, Anagnostou E,
Weksberg R, Fombonne E, Zwaigenbaum L, Fernandez BA, Roberts W, Rappold GA,
Marshall CR, Bourgeron T, Szatmari P, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology,
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Recent studies have highlighted the involvement of rare (<1% frequency)
copy-number variations and point mutations in the genetic etiology of autism
spectrum disorder (ASD); these variants particularly affect genes involved in the
neuronal synaptic complex. The SHANK gene family consists of three members
(SHANK1, SHANK2, and SHANK3), which encode scaffolding proteins required for the 
proper formation and function of neuronal synapses. Although SHANK2 and SHANK3
mutations have been implicated in ASD and intellectual disability, the
involvement of SHANK1 is unknown. Here, we assess microarray data from 1,158
Canadian and 456 European individuals with ASD to discover microdeletions at the 
SHANK1 locus on chromosome 19. We identify a hemizygous SHANK1 deletion that
segregates in a four-generation family in which male carriers--but not female
carriers--have ASD with higher functioning. A de novo SHANK1 deletion was also
detected in an unrelated male individual with ASD with higher functioning, and no
equivalent SHANK1 mutations were found in >15,000 controls (p = 0.009). The
discovery of apparent reduced penetrance of ASD in females bearing inherited
autosomal SHANK1 deletions provides a possible contributory model for the male
gender bias in autism. The data are also informative for clinical-genetics
interpretations of both inherited and sporadic forms of ASD involving SHANK1.

Copyright (c) 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3376495
PMID: 22503632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2012 May 15;160C(2):118-29. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31327. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

The genetic variability and commonality of neurodevelopmental disease.

Coe BP(1), Girirajan S, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University 
of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.

Despite detailed clinical definition and refinement of neurodevelopmental
disorders and neuropsychiatric conditions, the underlying genetic etiology has
proved elusive. Recent genetic studies have revealed some common themes:
considerable locus heterogeneity, variable expressivity for the same mutation,
and a role for multiple disruptive events in the same individual affecting genes 
in common pathways. Recurrent copy number variation (CNV), in particular, has
emphasized the importance of either de novo or essentially private mutations
creating imbalances for multiple genes. CNVs have foreshadowed a model where the 
distinction between milder neuropsychiatric conditions from those of severe
developmental impairment may be a consequence of increased mutational burden
affecting more genes.

Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4114147
PMID: 22499536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3083-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds124. Epub 2012 Apr
5.

Enriched rearing improves behavioral responses of an animal model for CNV-based
autistic-like traits.

Lacaria M(1), Spencer C, Gu W, Paylor R, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PTLS; MIM #610883), characterized by neurobehavioral
abnormalities, intellectual disability and congenital anomalies, is caused by a
3.7-Mb duplication in 17p11.2. Neurobehavioral studies determined that [?]70-90% of
PTLS subjects tested positive for autism or autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We
previously chromosomally engineered a mouse model for PTLS (Dp(11)17/+) with a
duplication of a 2-Mb genomic interval syntenic to the PTLS region and identified
consistent behavioral abnormalities in this mouse model. We now report extensive 
phenotyping with behavioral assays established to evaluate core and associated
autistic-like traits, including tests for social abnormalities, ultrasonic
vocalizations, perseverative and stereotypic behaviors, anxiety, learning and
memory deficits and motor defects. Alterations were identified in both core and
associated ASD-like traits. Rearing this animal model in an enriched environment 
mitigated some, and even rescued selected, neurobehavioral abnormalities,
suggesting a role for gene-environment interactions in the determination of copy 
number variation-mediated autism severity.

PMCID: PMC3384379
PMID: 22492990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Autism. 2012 Apr 2;3:2. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-3-2.

Evidence of novel fine-scale structural variation at autism spectrum disorder
candidate loci.

Hedges DJ(1), Hamilton-Nelson KL, Sacharow SJ, Nations L, Beecham GW, Kozhekbaeva
ZM, Butler BL, Cukier HN, Whitehead PL, Ma D, Jaworski JM, Nathanson L, Lee JM,
Hauser SL, Oksenberg JR, Cuccaro ML, Haines JL, Gilbert JR, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information: 
(1)Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, 1501 NW 10 Ave, M-860, Miami, FL 33136, USA. dhedges@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) represent a group of
neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by a core set of social-communicative 
and behavioral impairments. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the major
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, acting primarily via the GABA receptors
(GABR). Multiple lines of evidence, including altered GABA and GABA receptor
expression in autistic patients, indicate that the GABAergic system may be
involved in the etiology of autism.
METHODS: As copy number variations (CNVs), particularly rare and de novo CNVs,
have now been implicated in ASD risk, we examined the GABA receptors and genes in
related pathways for structural variation that may be associated with autism. We 
further extended our candidate gene set to include 19 genes and regions that had 
either been directly implicated in the autism literature or were directly related
(via function or ancestry) to these primary candidates. For the high resolution
CNV screen we employed custom-designed 244 k comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH) arrays. Collectively, our probes spanned a total of 11 Mb of GABA-related
and additional candidate regions with a density of approximately one probe every 
200 nucleotides, allowing a theoretical resolution for detection of CNVs of
approximately 1 kb or greater on average. One hundred and sixty-eight autism
cases and 149 control individuals were screened for structural variants.
Prioritized CNV events were confirmed using quantitative PCR, and confirmed loci 
were evaluated on an additional set of 170 cases and 170 control individuals that
were not included in the original discovery set. Loci that remained interesting
were subsequently screened via quantitative PCR on an additional set of 755 cases
and 1,809 unaffected family members.
RESULTS: Results include rare deletions in autistic individuals at JAKMIP1,
NRXN1, Neuroligin4Y, OXTR, and ABAT. Common insertion/deletion polymorphisms were
detected at several loci, including GABBR2 and NRXN3. Overall, statistically
significant enrichment in affected vs. unaffected individuals was observed for
NRXN1 deletions.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide additional support for the role of rare
structural variation in ASD.

PMCID: PMC3352055
PMID: 22472195  [PubMed]


49. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2012 Jun;22(3):229-37. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2012.03.002. Epub 
2012 Mar 29.

Genetic architecture in autism spectrum disorder.

Devlin B(1), Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3811
O'Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by impairments in reciprocal
social interaction and communication, and by restricted and repetitive behaviors.
Family studies indicate a significant genetic basis for ASD susceptibility, and
genomic scanning is beginning to elucidate the underlying genetic architecture.
Some 5-15% of individuals with ASD have an identifiable genetic etiology
corresponding to known chromosomal rearrangements or single gene disorders. Rare 
(<1% frequency) de novo or inherited copy number variations (CNVs) (especially
those that affect genes with synaptic function) are observed in 5-10% of
idiopathic ASD cases. These findings, coupled with genome sequencing data suggest
the existence of hundreds of ASD risk genes. Common variants, yet unidentified,
exert only small effects on risk. Identification of ASD risk genes with high
penetrance will broaden the targets amenable to genetic testing; while the
biological pathways revealed by the deeper list of ASD genes should narrow the
targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22463983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002592. Epub 2012 Mar 
22.

Age-dependent brain gene expression and copy number anomalies in autism suggest
distinct pathological processes at young versus mature ages.

Chow ML(1), Pramparo T, Winn ME, Barnes CC, Li HR, Weiss L, Fan JB, Murray S,
April C, Belinson H, Fu XD, Wynshaw-Boris A, Schork NJ, Courchesne E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, NIH-UCSD Autism Center of Excellence, School of
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States
of America.

Autism is a highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorder, yet the genetic
underpinnings of the disorder are largely unknown. Aberrant brain overgrowth is a
well-replicated observation in the autism literature; but association, linkage,
and expression studies have not identified genetic factors that explain this
trajectory. Few studies have had sufficient statistical power to investigate
whole-genome gene expression and genotypic variation in the autistic brain,
especially in regions that display the greatest growth abnormality. Previous
functional genomic studies have identified possible alterations in transcript
levels of genes related to neurodevelopment and immune function. Thus, there is a
need for genetic studies involving key brain regions to replicate these findings 
and solidify the role of particular functional pathways in autism pathogenesis.
We therefore sought to identify abnormal brain gene expression patterns via
whole-genome analysis of mRNA levels and copy number variations (CNVs) in
autistic and control postmortem brain samples. We focused on prefrontal cortex
tissue where excess neuron numbers and cortical overgrowth are pronounced in the 
majority of autism cases. We found evidence for dysregulation in pathways
governing cell number, cortical patterning, and differentiation in young autistic
prefrontal cortex. In contrast, adult autistic prefrontal cortex showed
dysregulation of signaling and repair pathways. Genes regulating cell cycle also 
exhibited autism-specific CNVs in DNA derived from prefrontal cortex, and these
genes were significantly associated with autism in genome-wide association study 
datasets. Our results suggest that CNVs and age-dependent gene expression changes
in autism may reflect distinct pathological processes in the developing versus
the mature autistic prefrontal cortex. Our results raise the hypothesis that
genetic dysregulation in the developing brain leads to abnormal regional
patterning, excess prefrontal neurons, cortical overgrowth, and neural
dysfunction in autism.

PMCID: PMC3310790
PMID: 22457638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cell. 2012 Mar 16;148(6):1223-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.02.039.

CNVs: harbingers of a rare variant revolution in psychiatric genetics.

Malhotra D(1), Sebat J.

Author information: 
(1)Beyster Center for Genomics of Psychiatric Diseases, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 1020103, USA.

The genetic bases of neuropsychiatric disorders are beginning to yield to
scientific inquiry. Genome-wide studies of copy number variation (CNV) have given
rise to a new understanding of disease etiology, bringing rare variants to the
forefront. A proportion of risk for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and autism
can be explained by rare mutations. Such alleles arise by de novo mutation in the
individual or in recent ancestry. Alleles can have specific effects on behavioral
and neuroanatomical traits; however, expressivity is variable, particularly for
neuropsychiatric phenotypes. Knowledge from CNV studies reflects the nature of
rare alleles in general and will serve as a guide as we move forward into a new
era of whole-genome sequencing.

Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3351385
PMID: 22424231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Psychiatr Res. 2012 May;46(5):630-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2011.10.015.
Epub 2012 Mar 9.

Mutation analysis of the NRXN1 gene in a Chinese autism cohort.

Liu Y(1), Hu Z, Xun G, Peng Y, Lu L, Xu X, Xiong Z, Xia L, Liu D, Li W, Zhao J,
Xia K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Science and Technology, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, China.

Autism is a brain developmental disorder characterized by impaired social
interaction and communication, as well as restricted and repetitive behaviors.
The neurexin-1(NRXN1) gene mapped on chromosome 2p16.3 encodes neurexin, a cell
adhesion molecule and receptor in the vertebrate nervous system. Rare de novo
alterations and copy number variations (CNVs) suggested neurexin-1 as a candidate
gene for the pathogenesis of autism, but data on the gene mutation of neurexin-1 
in Chinese Han population with autism are limited. By direct sequencing, we
analyzed the entire coding regions and associated splice junctions of neurexin-1 
in 313 Chinese autism patients. For exons in which non-synonymous variants were
identified, sequencing was performed in 500 healthy controls. We identified 22
variants in the neurexin-1 coding regions, including 7 missense variants, 3
deletions, and 12 synonymous mutations. Among them, 3 missense and 3 synonymous
variants were not reported in the dbSNP database and absent in 500 control
subjects; whereas 4 missense variants, 3 deletions and 3 synonymous mutations
were not reported in the dbSNP database but were identified in the control
subjects. However, there is no significant association of these mutations with
autism risk. Interestingly, there was a statistically significant association of 
neurexin-1 SNP P300P (rs2303298) with risk of autism (26.2% vs. 13.8%; kh(2) =
22.487; p = 3.45E-006; OR = 2.152 (1.559-2.970)). Our data suggest a possible
association of neurexin-1 with autism risk in Chinese Han population, warranting 
further large-scale study on this gene.

Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22405623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Genet. 2013 Feb;83(2):145-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01860.x. Epub
2012 Apr 9.

Clinical application of 2.7M Cytogenetics array for CNV detection in subjects
with idiopathic autism and/or intellectual disability.

Qiao Y(1), Tyson C, Hrynchak M, Lopez-Rangel E, Hildebrand J, Martell S, Fawcett 
C, Kasmara L, Calli K, Harvard C, Liu X, Holden JJ, Lewis SM, Rajcan-Separovic E.

Author information: 
(1)BC Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Higher resolution whole-genome arrays facilitate the identification of smaller
copy number variations (CNVs) and their integral genes contributing to autism
and/or intellectual disability (ASD/ID). Our study describes the use of one of
the highest resolution arrays, the Affymetrix((r)) Cytogenetics 2.7M array, coupled
with quantitative multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of short fluorescent 
fragments (QMPSF) for detection and validation of small CNVs. We studied 82
subjects with ASD and ID in total (30 in the validation and 52 in the application
cohort) and detected putatively pathogenic CNVs in 6/52 cases from the
application cohort. This included a 130-kb maternal duplication spanning exons
64-79 of the DMD gene which was found in a 3-year-old boy manifesting autism and 
mild neuromotor delays. Other pathogenic CNVs involved 4p14, 12q24.31, 14q32.31, 
15q13.2-13.3, and 17p13.3. We established the optimal experimental conditions
which, when applied to select small CNVs for QMPSF confirmation, reduced the
false positive rate from 60% to 25%. Our work suggests that selection of small
CNVs based on the function of integral genes, followed by review of array
experimental parameters resulting in highest confirmation rate using multiplex
PCR, may enhance the usefulness of higher resolution platforms for ASD and ID
gene discovery.

(c) 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22369279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Feb;29(1):77-81. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.01.019.

[Genetic analysis of a supernumerary derivative chromosome 15].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang F(1), Yang Y, Wang CZ, He XI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Genetics, Bayi Children's Hospital, the General Hospital
of Beijing Military Region, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect and analyze a supernumerary derivative chromosome 15 with
combined cytogenetic and molecular techniques, and to discuss the correlation
between genomic copy number variations (CNVs) and clinical phenotypes.
METHODS: G-banded chromosome analysis and multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) were carried out. The whole genome of the patient was also
analyzed with array-comparative genome hybridization(array-CGH).
RESULTS: G-banding analysis indicated that the patient has a karyotype of 47, XY,
+ mar, with the supernumerary chromsome derived from 15q11-13 region spanning 9.8
Mb from locus 20477397 to 30298155.
CONCLUSION: CNVs of 15q11-13 are associated with mental retardation, language
development delay and autistic disorder. Conventional cytogenetic analysis with
array-CGH may provide a platform for accurate detection of chromosomal
aberrations, which can faciliate the study of genome rearrangement underlying
various diseases.

PMID: 22311498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar 1;71(5):390-1. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.12.017.

Genomic tics in tourette syndrome.

Mulle JG(1), Warren ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA. jmulle@emory.edu

Comment on
    Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar 1;71(5):392-402.

PMID: 22310325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Curr Genomics. 2011 Aug;12(5):322-32. doi: 10.2174/138920211796429745.

Genetics and mitochondrial abnormalities in autism spectrum disorders: a review.

Dhillon S(1), Hellings JA, Butler MG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences and Pediatrics, Kansas
University Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

We review the current status of the role and function of the mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) in the etiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and the interaction of
nuclear and mitochondrial genes. High lactate levels reported in about one in
five children with ASD may indicate involvement of the mitochondria in energy
metabolism and brain development. Mitochondrial disturbances include depletion,
decreased quantity or mutations of mtDNA producing defects in biochemical
reactions within the mitochondria. A subset of individuals with ASD manifests
copy number variation or small DNA deletions/duplications, but fewer than 20
percent are diagnosed with a single gene condition such as fragile X syndrome.
The remaining individuals with ASD have chromosomal abnormalities (e.g.,
15q11-q13 duplications), other genetic or multigenic causes or epigenetic
defects. Next generation DNA sequencing techniques will enable better
characterization of genetic and molecular anomalies in ASD, including defects in 
the mitochondrial genome particularly in younger children.

PMCID: PMC3145262
PMID: 22294875  [PubMed]


57. Bioinformatics. 2012 Mar 1;28(5):724-5. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts032. Epub 
2012 Jan 18.

AnnTools: a comprehensive and versatile annotation toolkit for genomic variants.

Makarov V(1), O'Grady T, Cai G, Lihm J, Buxbaum JD, Yoon S.

Author information: 
(1)The Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Department of Psychiatry,
Levy Library, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.
vladimir.makarov@mssm.edu

AnnTools is a versatile bioinformatics application designed for comprehensive
annotation of a full spectrum of human genome variation: novel and known
single-nucleotide substitutions (SNP/SNV), short insertions/deletions (INDEL) and
structural variants/copy number variation (SV/CNV). The variants are interpreted 
by interrogating data compiled from 15 constantly updated sources. In addition to
detailed functional characterization of the coding variants, AnnTools searches
for overlaps with regulatory elements, disease/trait associated loci, known
segmental duplications and artifact prone regions, thereby offering an integrated
and comprehensive analysis of genomic data. The tool conveniently accepts
user-provided tracks for custom annotation and offers flexibility in input data
formats. The output is generated in the universal Variant Call Format. High
annotation speed makes AnnTools suitable for high-throughput sequencing
facilities, while a low-memory footprint and modest CPU requirements allow it to 
operate on a personal computer. The application is freely available for public
use; the package includes installation scripts and a set of helper
tools.AVAILABILITY: http://anntools.sourceforge.net/.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC3289923
PMID: 22257670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2012;12:345-60. doi: 10.1007/7854_2011_179.

Rare genomic deletions and duplications and their role in neurodevelopmental
disorders.

Glessner JT(1), Connolly JJ, Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.

Copy number variations (CNVs) are deletions and duplications of DNA sequences
that vary in length from a few base pairs to several million. While these
structural variations are often benign, they can disrupt vital biological
functions and result in disease. CNVs have been identified as causal in a number 
of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDs), including but not limited to, autism,
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and schizophrenia. Here, we
examine CNV research into these disorders, and discuss relevant methodological
considerations. By identifying specific rare deletions and duplications, we may
be better able to determine the etiology of neurodevelopmental disorders and
identify appropriate treatments.

PMID: 22241247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 May;20(5):540-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.244. Epub 2012 Jan 
11.

Autism multiplex family with 16p11.2p12.2 microduplication syndrome in
monozygotic twins and distal 16p11.2 deletion in their brother.

Tabet AC(1), Pilorge M, Delorme R, Amsellem F, Pinard JM, Leboyer M, Verloes A,
Benzacken B, Betancur C.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Robert Debre Hospital, Department of Genetics, Cytogenetics Unit,
Paris, France .

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 May;20(5):594.

The pericentromeric region of chromosome 16p is rich in segmental duplications
that predispose to rearrangements through non-allelic homologous recombination.
Several recurrent copy number variations have been described recently in
chromosome 16p. 16p11.2 rearrangements (29.5-30.1 Mb) are associated with autism,
intellectual disability (ID) and other neurodevelopmental disorders. Another
recognizable but less common microdeletion syndrome in 16p11.2p12.2 (21.4 to
28.5-30.1 Mb) has been described in six individuals with ID, whereas apparently
reciprocal duplications, studied by standard cytogenetic and fluorescence in situ
hybridization techniques, have been reported in three patients with autism
spectrum disorders. Here, we report a multiplex family with three boys affected
with autism, including two monozygotic twins carrying a de novo 16p11.2p12.2
duplication of 8.95 Mb (21.28-30.23 Mb) characterized by single-nucleotide
polymorphism array, encompassing both the 16p11.2 and 16p11.2p12.2 regions. The
twins exhibited autism, severe ID, and dysmorphic features, including a
triangular face, deep-set eyes, large and prominent nasal bridge, and tall,
slender build. The eldest brother presented with autism, mild ID, early-onset
obesity and normal craniofacial features, and carried a smaller, overlapping
16p11.2 microdeletion of 847 kb (28.40-29.25 Mb), inherited from his apparently
healthy father. Recurrent deletions in this region encompassing the SH2B1 gene
were recently reported in early-onset obesity and in individuals with
neurodevelopmental disorders associated with phenotypic variability. We discuss
the clinical and genetic implications of two different 16p chromosomal
rearrangements in this family, and suggest that the 16p11.2 deletion in the
father predisposed to the formation of the duplication in his twin children.

PMCID: PMC3330222
PMID: 22234155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;838:273-89. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-507-7_13.

Online resources for genomic structural variation.

Sneddon TP(1), Church DM.

Author information: 
(1)NCBI, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA.

Genomic structural variation (SV) can be thought of on a continuum from a single 
base pair insertion/deletion (INDEL) to large megabase-scale rearrangements
involving insertions, deletions, duplications, inversions, or translocations of
whole chromosomes or chromosome arms. These variants can occur in coding or
noncoding DNA, they can be inherited or arise sporadically in the germline or
somatic cells. Many of these events are segregating in the population and can be 
considered common alleles while others are new alleles and thus rare events. All 
species studied to date harbor structural variants and these may be benign,
contributing to phenotypes such as sensory perception and immunity, or pathogenic
resulting in genomic disorders including DiGeorge/velocardiofacial,
Smith-Margenis, Williams-Beuren, and Prader-Willi syndromes. As structural
variants are identified, validated, and their significance, origin, and
prevalence are elucidated, it is of critical importance that these data be
collected and collated in a way that can be easily accessed and analyzed. This
chapter describes current structural variation online resources (see Fig. 1 and
Table 1), highlights the challenges in capturing, storing, and displaying SV
data, and discusses how dbVar and DGVa, the genomic structural variation
databases developed at NCBI and EBI, respectively, were designed to address these
issues.

PMCID: PMC3804003
PMID: 22228017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;838:115-35. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-507-7_5.

Detection and characterization of copy number variation in autism spectrum
disorder.

Marshall CR(1), Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

There now exist multiple lines of evidence pointing to a significant genetic
component underlying the aetiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). The
advent of methodologies for scanning the human genome at high resolution, coupled
with the recognition of copy number variation (CNV) as a prevalent source of
genomic variation, has led to new strategies in the identification of clinically 
relevant loci. Balanced genomic changes, such as translocations and inversions,
also contribute to ASD, but current studies have shown that screening with
microarrays has up to fivefold increase in diagnostic yield. Recent work by our
group and others has shown unbalanced genomic alterations that are likely
pathogenic in upwards of 10% of cases, highlighting an important role for CNVs in
the genetic aetiology of ASD. A trend in our empirical data has shifted focus for
discovery of candidate loci towards individually rare but highly penetrant CNVs
instead of looking for common variants of low penetrance. This strategy has
proven largely successful in identifying ASD-susceptibility candidate loci,
including gains and losses at 16p11.2, SHANK2, NRXN1, and PTCHD1. Another
emerging and intriguing trend is the identification of the same genes implicated 
by rare CNVs across neurodevelopmental disorders, including schizophrenia,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and intellectual disability. These
observations indicate that similar pathways may be involved in phenotypically
distinct outcomes. Although interrogation of the genome at high resolution has
led to these novel discoveries, it has also made cataloguing, characterization,
and clinical interpretation of the increasing amount of CNV data difficult.
Herein, we describe the history of genomic structural variation in ASD and how
CNV discovery has been used to pinpoint novel ASD-susceptibility loci. We also
discuss the overlap of CNVs across neurodevelopmental disorders and comment on
the current challenges of understanding the relationship between CNVs and
associated phenotypes in a clinical context.

PMID: 22228009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;838:29-75. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-507-7_2.

Microdeletion and microduplication syndromes.

Vissers LE(1), Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

During the past decade, widespread use of microarray-based technologies,
including oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping arrays have dramatically changed 
our perspective on genome-wide structural variation. Submicroscopic genomic
rearrangements or copy-number variation (CNV) have proven to be an important
factor responsible for primate evolution, phenotypic differences between
individuals and populations, and susceptibility to many diseases. The number of
diseases caused by chromosomal microdeletions and microduplications, also
referred to as genomic disorders, has been increasing at a rapid pace.
Microdeletions and microduplications are found in patients with a wide variety of
phenotypes, including Mendelian diseases as well as common complex traits, such
as developmental delay/intellectual disability, autism, schizophrenia, obesity,
and epilepsy. This chapter provides an overview of common microdeletion and
microduplication syndromes and their clinical phenotypes, and discusses the
genomic structures and molecular mechanisms of formation. In addition, an
explanation for how these genomic rearrangements convey abnormal phenotypes is
provided.

PMID: 22228006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Brain Nerve. 2012 Jan;64(1):65-70.

[Autism spectrum disorder and genes for synaptic proteins].

[Article in Japanese]

Shishido E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Physiology, National Institute for Physiological
Sciences, Japan.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by impaired social interaction
and communication, and restricted interests. It is generally accepted that ASD is
caused by abnormalities in the structure or functions of the brain. Recent
genome-wide analyses have identified copy number variations (CNVs) of neuronal
genes in the genomes of ASD patients. CNV is a commonly observed phenomenon in
human beings. During the first cell division of meiosis, irregular crossing over 
between homologous chromosomes results in loss or duplication of a segment. From 
2007 to 2010, several groups performed a large-scale virtual screening of CNVs in
ASD genomes. Genes affected by CNV, de novo CNVs, and rare CNVs were more
prevalent in ASD. The results highlighted the CNVs of many neuronal genes
associated with ASD. A fraction of these genes was previously identified in ASD
but some were newly identified in each study. The CNVs implicated in ASD include 
neuronal genes belonging to 4 classes. These genes encode (1) neural adhesion
molecules, including cadherins, neuroligin, and neurexin; (2) scaffold proteins
such as SHANK3; (3) protein kinases and other intracellular signaling molecules; 
and (4) proteins that regulate protein syntheses. In general, these proteins play
a role in synapse of glutamatergic neurons. The CNVs detected in the ASD patient 
genomes of imply a link between the synaptic proteins and pathological
characteristics of ASD. Altered protein dosage by the CNVs may alter the
functional quality of ASD patient's synapses, and may consequently affect their
development of language and communication skills. There are 2 types of ASD, one
is sporadic and, the other is familial. According to some reports, de novo CNVs
are more frequently observed in sporadic-type ASD. However, it is generally
understood that a combination of particular CNVs and other possible mutations
underlie the pathology of ASD regardless of ASD type. The major symptoms of ASD
are often curable with behavioral intervention during early childhood. An early
diagnosis, followed by early start of treatment is crucial for language
development and communication skills. Further and broader research on genomes
will eventually provide information on the biological characteristics of ASD, as 
well as on specific ASD genotypes, thus aiding in the establishment of optimal
treatment and medication to meet the biological conditions of each patient.

PMID: 22223503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan 13;90(1):133-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.025. Epub
2011 Dec 29.

Rare deletions at the neurexin 3 locus in autism spectrum disorder.

Vaags AK(1), Lionel AC, Sato D, Goodenberger M, Stein QP, Curran S, Ogilvie C,
Ahn JW, Drmic I, Senman L, Chrysler C, Thompson A, Russell C, Prasad A, Walker S,
Pinto D, Marshall CR, Stavropoulos DJ, Zwaigenbaum L, Fernandez BA, Fombonne E,
Bolton PF, Collier DA, Hodge JC, Roberts W, Szatmari P, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Centre for Applied Genomics, the
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The three members of the human neurexin gene family, neurexin 1 (NRXN1), neurexin
2 (NRXN2), and neurexin 3 (NRXN3), encode neuronal adhesion proteins that have
important roles in synapse development and function. In autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD), as well as in other neurodevelopmental conditions, rare exonic copy-number
variants and/or point mutations have been identified in the NRXN1 and NRXN2 loci.
We present clinical characterization of four index cases who have been diagnosed 
with ASD and who possess rare inherited or de novo microdeletions at
14q24.3-31.1, a region that overlaps exons of the alpha and/or beta isoforms of
NRXN3. NRXN3 deletions were found in one father with subclinical autism and in a 
carrier mother and father without formal ASD diagnoses, indicating issues of
penetrance and expressivity at this locus. Notwithstanding these clinical
complexities, this report on ASD-affected individuals who harbor NRXN3 exonic
deletions advances the understanding of the genetic etiology of autism, further
enabling molecular diagnoses.

Copyright (c) 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3257896
PMID: 22209245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Autism Open Access. 2012;Suppl 1:001.

Mouse Models of 22q11.2-Associated Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Hiroi N(1), Hiramoto T(2), Harper KM(3), Suzuki G(4), Boku S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA ; Department
of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA. 
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University, Ward 
Building Room 9-258, 303 E. Chicago Ave. Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama
359-8513, Japan.

Copy number variation (CNV) of human chromosome 22q11.2 is associated with an
elevated rate of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and represents one of syndromic
ASDs with rare genetic variants. However, the precise genetic basis of this
association remains unclear due to its relatively large hemizygous and
duplication region, including more than 30 genes. Previous studies using genetic 
mouse models suggested that although not all 22q11.2 genes contribute to ASD
symptomatology, more than one 22q11.2 genes have distinct phenotypic targets for 
ASD symptoms. Our data show that deficiency of the two 22q11.2 genesTbx1 and
Sept5 causes distinct phenotypic sets of ASD symptoms.

PMCID: PMC4118685
PMID: 25089229  [PubMed]


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):361-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1309324111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Ohnologs are overrepresented in pathogenic copy number mutations.

McLysaght A(1), Makino T, Grayton HM, Tropeano M, Mitchell KJ, Vassos E, Collier 
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Dublin
2, Ireland.

A number of rare copy number variants (CNVs), including both deletions and
duplications, have been associated with developmental disorders, including
schizophrenia, autism, intellectual disability, and epilepsy. Pathogenicity may
derive from dosage sensitivity of one or more genes contained within the CNV
locus. To understand pathophysiology, the specific disease-causing gene(s) within
each CNV need to be identified. In the present study, we test the hypothesis that
ohnologs (genes retained after ancestral whole-genome duplication events, which
are frequently dosage sensitive) are overrepresented in pathogenic CNVs. We
selected three sets of genes implicated in copy number pathogenicity: (i) genes
mapping within rare disease-associated CNVs, (ii) genes within de novo CNVs under
negative genetic selection, and (iii) genes identified by clinical array
comparative genome hybridization studies as potentially pathogenic. We compared
the proportion of ohnologs between these gene sets and control genes, mapping to 
CNVs not known to be disease associated. We found that ohnologs are significantly
overrepresented in genes mapping to pathogenic CNVs, irrespective of how CNVs
were identified, with over 90% containing an ohnolog, compared with control CNVs 
>100 kb, where only about 30% contained an ohnolog. In some CNVs, such as
del15p11.2 (CYFIP1) and dup/del16p13.11 (NDE1), the most plausible prior
candidate gene was also an ohnolog, as were the genes VIPR2 and NRXN1, each found
in short CNVs containing no other genes. Our results support the hypothesis that 
ohnologs represent critical dosage-sensitive elements of the genome, possibly
responsible for some of the deleterious phenotypes observed for pathogenic CNVs
and as such are readily identifiable candidate genes for further study.

PMCID: PMC3890797
PMID: 24368850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nature. 2014 Jan 16;505(7483):361-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12818. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

CNVs conferring risk of autism or schizophrenia affect cognition in controls.

Stefansson H(1), Meyer-Lindenberg A(2), Steinberg S(3), Magnusdottir B(4), Morgen
K(5), Arnarsdottir S(6), Bjornsdottir G(3), Walters GB(3), Jonsdottir GA(3),
Doyle OM(7), Tost H(5), Grimm O(5), Kristjansdottir S(3), Snorrason H(3),
Davidsdottir SR(4), Gudmundsson LJ(3), Jonsson GF(3), Stefansdottir B(3),
Helgadottir I(4), Haraldsson M(8), Jonsdottir B(9), Thygesen JH(10), Schwarz
AJ(11), Didriksen M(12), Stensbol TB(12), Brammer M(7), Kapur S(7), Halldorsson
JG(13), Hreidarsson S(14), Saemundsen E(15), Sigurdsson E(8), Stefansson K(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] deCODE genetics/Amgen, Sturlugata 8, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland [2]. (2)1]
Central Institute of Mental Health, University of Heidelberg Medical Faculty
Mannheim, 68159 Mannheim, Germany [2]. (3)deCODE genetics/Amgen, Sturlugata 8,
IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. (4)Landspitali, Department of Psychiatry, National
University Hospital, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. (5)Central Institute of Mental
Health, University of Heidelberg Medical Faculty Mannheim, 68159 Mannheim,
Germany. (6)1] deCODE genetics/Amgen, Sturlugata 8, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland [2]
Landspitali, Department of Psychiatry, National University Hospital, IS-101
Reykjavik, Iceland. (7)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College, 16 De Crespigny
Park, London SE5 8AF, UK. (8)1] Landspitali, Department of Psychiatry, National
University Hospital, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland [2] University of Iceland, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Iceland, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. (9)Rontgen Domus, 
Egilsgotu 3, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. (10)Mental Health Centre Sct. Hans,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry,
Boserupvej 2, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark. (11)Tailored Therapeutics, Lilly
Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly Corporate Center DC 1940,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA. (12)H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 9, DK-2500
Valby, Denmark. (13)University of Iceland, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Iceland, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. (14)The State Diagnostic and Counselling
Centre, Digranesvegur 5, IS-200 Kopavogur, Iceland. (15)1] University of Iceland,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland [2] The
State Diagnostic and Counselling Centre, Digranesvegur 5, IS-200 Kopavogur,
Iceland.

In a small fraction of patients with schizophrenia or autism, alleles of
copy-number variants (CNVs) in their genomes are probably the strongest factors
contributing to the pathogenesis of the disease. These CNVs may provide an entry 
point for investigations into the mechanisms of brain function and dysfunction
alike. They are not fully penetrant and offer an opportunity to study their
effects separate from that of manifest disease. Here we show in an Icelandic
sample that a few of the CNVs clearly alter fecundity (measured as the number of 
children by age 45). Furthermore, we use various tests of cognitive function to
demonstrate that control subjects carrying the CNVs perform at a level that is
between that of schizophrenia patients and population controls. The CNVs do not
all affect the same cognitive domains, hence the cognitive deficits that drive or
accompany the pathogenesis vary from one CNV to another. Controls carrying the
chromosome 15q11.2 deletion between breakpoints 1 and 2 (15q11.2(BP1-BP2)
deletion) have a history of dyslexia and dyscalculia, even after adjusting for IQ
in the analysis, and the CNV only confers modest effects on other cognitive
traits. The 15q11.2(BP1-BP2) deletion affects brain structure in a pattern
consistent with both that observed during first-episode psychosis in
schizophrenia and that of structural correlates in dyslexia.

PMID: 24352232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):343-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1309475110. 
Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Scan statistic-based analysis of exome sequencing data identifies FAN1 at 15q13.3
as a susceptibility gene for schizophrenia and autism.

Ionita-Laza I(1), Xu B, Makarov V, Buxbaum JD, Roos JL, Gogos JA, Karayiorgou M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biostatistics, Psychiatry, Neuroscience, Physiology, and
Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

We used a family-based cluster detection approach designed to localize
significant rare disease-risk variants clusters within a region of interest to
systematically search for schizophrenia (SCZ) susceptibility genes within 49
genomic loci previously implicated by de novo copy number variants. Using two
independent whole-exome sequencing family datasets and a follow-up autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) case/control whole-exome sequencing dataset, we
identified variants in one gene, Fanconi-associated nuclease 1 (FAN1), as being
associated with both SCZ and ASD. FAN1 is located in a region on chromosome
15q13.3 implicated by a recurrent copy number variant, which predisposes to an
array of psychiatric and neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In both SCZ and ASD
datasets, rare nonsynonymous risk variants cluster significantly in affected
individuals within a 20-kb window that spans several key functional domains of
the gene. Our finding suggests that FAN1 is a key driver in the 15q13.3 locus for
the associated psychiatric and neurodevelopmental phenotypes. FAN1 encodes a DNA 
repair enzyme, thus implicating abnormalities in DNA repair in the susceptibility
to SCZ or ASD.

PMCID: PMC3890869
PMID: 24344280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Jan;165B(1):52-61. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32204. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Sequence analysis of 17 NRXN1 deletions.

Enggaard Hoeffding LK(1), Hansen T, Ingason A, Doung L, Thygesen JH, Moller RS,
Tommerup N, Kirov G, Rujescu D, Larsen LA, Werge T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Centre Sct. Hans,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Genome instability plays fundamental roles in human evolution and
phenotypic variation within our population. This instability leads to genomic
rearrangements that are involved in a wide variety of human disorders, including 
congenital and neurodevelopmental disorders, and cancers. Insight into the
molecular mechanisms governing such genomic rearrangements may increase our
understanding of disease pathology and evolutionary processes. Here we analyse 17
carriers of non-recurrent deletions in the NRXN1 gene, which have been associated
with neurodevelopmental disorders, e.g. schizophrenia, autism and epilepsies.
METHODS: 17 non-recurrent NRXN1 deletions identified by GWA were sequenced to map
the breakpoints of each. Meme ... etc. was used to identify shared patterns between
the deletions and compare these were previously studies on non-recurrent
deletions.
RESULTS: We discovered two novel sequence motifs shared between all 17 NRXN1
deletions and a significantly higher AT nucleotide content at the breakpoints,
compared to the overall nucleotide content on chromosome 2. We found different
alteration of sequence at the breakpoint; small insertions and duplications
giving rise to short microhomology sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: No single mechanism seems to be implicated in the deletion events,
but the results suggest that NHEJ, FoSTeS or MMBIR is implicated. The two novel
sequence motifs together with a high AT content in all in NRXN1 deletions may
lead to increased instability leading to a increase susceptibility to a single
stranded structures. This favours potentially repaired by NHEJ mechanism of
double strand breaks or may leading to replication errors. (c) 2013 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

(c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24339137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):377-85. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36279. Epub 2013
Dec 5.

Changing interpretation of chromosomal microarray over time in a community cohort
with intellectual disability.

Palmer E(1), Speirs H, Taylor PJ, Mullan G, Turner G, Einfeld S, Tonge B, Mowat
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospital, NSW, Australia;
School of Women's and Children's Health, The University of NSW, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.

Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is the first-line diagnostic test for individuals
with intellectual disability, autism, or multiple congenital anomalies, with a
10-20% diagnostic yield. An ongoing challenge for the clinician and laboratory
scientist is the interpretation of variants of uncertain significance
(VOUS)-usually rare, unreported genetic variants. Laboratories differ in their
threshold for reporting VOUS, and clinical practice varies in how this
information is conveyed to the family and what follow-up is arranged. Workflows, 
websites, and databases are constantly being updated to aid the interpretation of
VOUS. There is a growing literature reporting new microdeletion and duplication
syndromes, susceptibility, and modifier copy number variants (CNVs). Diagnostic
methods are also evolving with new array platforms and genome builds. In 2010,
high-resolution arrays (Affymetrix 2.7 M Oligo and SNP, 50 kB resolution) were
performed on a community cohort of 67 individuals with intellectual disability of
unknown aetiology. Three hundred and one CNVs were detected and analyzed using
contemporary resources and a simple scoring system. Thirteen (19%) of the arrays 
were assessed as potentially pathogenic, 4 (6%) as benign and 50 (75%) of
uncertain clinical significance. The CNV data were re-analyzed in 2012 using the 
contemporary interpretative resources. There was a statistically significant
difference in the assessment of individual CNVs (P < 0.0001). An additional eight
patients were reassessed as having a potentially pathogenic array (n = 21, 31%)
and several additional susceptibility or modifier CNVs were identified. This
study highlights the complexity involved in the interpretation of CMA and
uniquely demonstrates how, even on the same array platform, it can be subject to 
change over time.

(c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24311194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Med Wieku Rozwoj. 2013 Jul-Sep;17(3):207-23.

[Genetic bases of autism spectrum disorders].

[Article in Polish]

Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik B(1), Kastory-Bronowska M, Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Genetyki Medycznej, Instytut Matki i Dziecka, Kasprzaka 17a, 01-211
Warszawa, 0048 22 32-77-145, pawel.stankiewicz@imid.med.pl.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are an etiologically and clinically
heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental disorders affecting approximately
0.6-1% of the general population. ASDs are characterized by deficits in social
communication, impaired language development, and stereotyped repetitive
behaviour. The impact of genetic factors in ASDs has been confirmed in the past
few years. Numerous studies have shown that among patients with ASDs,
approximately 10% have DNA copy number variation and 10-20% point mutations. Most
of the deficiencies identified in individuals with ASDs relate to genes encoding 
proteins involved mainly in the development of neurons and their synapses
functioning in various signaling pathways. Due to the large heterogeneity of
identified changes in the genome of individuals with ASDs, the newest techniques 
enabling analysis of the entire genome in one study (microarrays, next-generation
sequencing) are the methods of choice in the diagnostics of this pathology.

PMID: 24296445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2013;113:251-67. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-418700-9.00008-3.

Orchestration of neurodevelopmental programs by RBFOX1: implications for autism
spectrum disorder.

Bill BR(1), Lowe JK, Dybuncio CT, Fogel BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, David Geffen School of Medicine, Center for Autism
Research and Treatment and Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute
for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

Neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders result from complex
interactions between critical genetic factors and as-yet-unknown environmental
components. To gain clinical insight, it is critical to develop a comprehensive
understanding of these genetic components. RBFOX1, an RNA splicing factor,
regulates expression of large genetic networks during early neuronal development,
and haploinsufficiency causes severe neurodevelopmental phenotypes including
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), intellectual disability, and epilepsy. Genomic
testing in individuals and large patient cohorts has identified phenotypically
similar cases possessing copy number variations in RBFOX1, implicating the gene
as an important cause of neurodevelopmental disease. However, a significant
proportion of the observed structural variation is inherited from phenotypically 
normal individuals, raising questions regarding overall pathogenicity of
variation at the RBFOX1 locus. In this chapter, we discuss the molecular,
cellular, and clinical evidence supporting the role of RBFOX1 in neurodevelopment
and present a comprehensive model for the contribution of structural variation in
RBFOX1 to ASD.

(c) 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4318517
PMID: 24290388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Psychiatr Res. 2014 Feb;49:60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.10.022. Epub
2013 Nov 9.

Genome-wide copy number variation analysis in adult attention-deficit and
hyperactivity disorder.

Ramos-Quiroga JA(1), Sanchez-Mora C(2), Casas M(1), Garcia-Martinez I(3), Bosch
R(4), Nogueira M(5), Corrales M(5), Palomar G(5), Vidal R(5), Coll-Tane M(3),
Bayes M(6), Cormand B(7), Ribases M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain; Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona,
Spain; Department of Psychiatry and Legal Medicine, Universitat Autonoma de
Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall
d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health
(CIBERSAM), Barcelona, Spain; Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research
Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Vall
d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Biomedical
Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain. (6)Centro Nacional de Analisis Genomico (CNAG), Parc Cientific de
Barcelona (PCB), Spain. (7)Departament de Genetica, Facultat de Biologia,
Universitat de Barcelona, Spain; Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain;
Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Spain.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain; Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona,
Spain; Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR),
Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: marta.ribases@gmail.com.

Attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common psychiatric
disorder with a worldwide prevalence of 5-6% in children and 4.4% in adults.
Recently, copy number variations (CNVs) have been implicated in different
neurodevelopmental disorders such as ADHD. Based on these previous reports that
focused on pediatric cohorts, we hypothesize that structural variants may also
contribute to adult ADHD and that such genomic variation may be enriched for CNVs
previously identified in children with ADHD. To address this issue, we performed 
for the first time a whole-genome CNV study on 400 adults with ADHD and 526
screened controls. In agreement with recent reports in children with ADHD or in
other psychiatric disorders, we identified a significant excess of insertions in 
ADHD patients compared to controls. The overall rate of CNVs >100 kb was 1.33
times higher in ADHD subjects than in controls (p = 2.4e-03), an observation
mainly driven by a higher proportion of small events (from 100 kb to 500 kb;
1.35-fold; p = 1.3e-03). These differences remained significant when we
considered CNVs that overlap genes or when structural variants spanning candidate
genes for psychiatric disorders were evaluated, with duplications showing the
greatest difference (1.41-fold, p = 0.024 and 2.85-fold, p = 8.5e-03,
respectively). However, no significant enrichment was detected in our ADHD cohort
for childhood ADHD-associated CNVs, CNVs previously identified in at least one
ADHD patient or CNVs previously implicated in autism or schizophrenia. In
conclusion, our study provides tentative evidence for a higher rate of CNVs in
adults with ADHD compared to controls and contributes to the growing list of
structural variants potentially involved in the etiology of the disease.

Copyright (c) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 12;8(11):e79973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079973.
eCollection 2013.

Structural variation-associated expression changes are paralleled by chromatin
architecture modifications.

Gheldof N(1), Witwicki RM, Migliavacca E, Leleu M, Didelot G, Harewood L,
Rougemont J, Reymond A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Copy number variants (CNVs) influence the expression of genes that map not only
within the rearrangement, but also to its flanks. To assess the possible
mechanism(s) underlying this "neighboring effect", we compared intrachromosomal
interactions and histone modifications in cell lines of patients affected by
genomic disorders and control individuals. Using chromosome conformation capture 
(4C-seq), we observed that a set of genes flanking the Williams-Beuren Syndrome
critical region (WBSCR) were often looping together. The newly identified
interacting genes include AUTS2, mutations of which are associated with autism
and intellectual disabilities. Deletion of the WBSCR disrupts the expression of
this group of flanking genes, as well as long-range interactions between them and
the rearranged interval. We also pinpointed concomitant changes in histone
modifications between samples. We conclude that large genomic rearrangements can 
lead to chromatin conformation changes that extend far away from the structural
variant, thereby possibly modulating expression globally and modifying the
phenotype.GEO SERIES ACCESSION NUMBER: GSE33784, GSE33867.

PMCID: PMC3827143
PMID: 24265791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Nov 7;93(5):825-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.09.013. Epub
2013 Oct 24.

The roles of FMRP-regulated genes in autism spectrum disorder: single- and
multiple-hit genetic etiologies.

Steinberg J(1), Webber C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology,
Anatomy, and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK; The Wellcome
Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable complex neurodevelopmental
condition characterized by impairments in social interaction and communication
and restricted and repetitive behaviors. Although roles for both de novo and
familial genetic variation have been documented, the underlying disease
mechanisms remain poorly elucidated. In this study, we defined and explored
distinct etiologies of genetic variants that affect genes regulated by Fragile-X 
mental retardation protein (FMRP), thought to play a key role in neuroplasticity 
and neuronal translation, in ASD-affected individuals. In particular, we
developed the Trend test, a pathway-association test that is able to robustly
detect multiple-hit etiologies and is more powerful than existing approaches.
Exploiting detailed spatiotemporal maps of gene expression within the human
brain, we identified four discrete FMRP-target subpopulations that exhibit
distinct functional biases and contribute to ASD via different types of genetic
variation. We also demonstrated that FMRP target genes are more likely than other
genes with similar expression patterns to contribute to disease. We developed the
hypothesis that FMRP targets contribute to ASD via two distinct etiologies: (1)
ultra-rare and highly penetrant single disruptions of embryonically upregulated
FMRP targets ("single-hit etiology") or (2) the combination of multiple less
penetrant disruptions of nonembryonic, synaptic FMRP targets ("multiple-hit
etiology"). The Trend test provides rigorous support for a multiple-hit genetic
etiology in a subset of autism cases and is easily extendible to combining
information from multiple types of genetic variation (i.e., copy-number and exome
variants), increasing its value to next-generation sequencing approaches.

Copyright (c) 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3824119
PMID: 24207117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Oct;162B(7):734-41. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32153.

Chromosomal abnormalities in patients with autism spectrum disorders from Taiwan.

Liao HM(1), Gau SS, Tsai WC, Fang JS, Su YC, Chou MC, Liu SK, Chou WJ, Wu YY,
Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are childhood-onset neurodevelopmental disorders 
characterized by verbal communication impairments, social reciprocity deficits,
and the presence of restricted interests and stereotyped behaviors. Genetic
factors contribute to the incidence of ASD evidently. However, the genetic
spectrum of ASD is highly heterogeneous. Chromosomal abnormalities contribute
significantly to the genetic deficits of syndromic and non-syndromic ASD. In this
study, we conducted karyotyping analysis in a sample of 500 patients (447 males, 
53 females) with ASD from Taiwan, the largest cohort in Asia, to the best of our 
knowledge. We found three patients having sex chromosome aneuploidy, including
two cases of 47, XXY and one case of 47, XYY. In addition, we detected a novel
reciprocal chromosomal translocation between long arms of chromosomes 4 and 14,
designated t(4;14)(q31.3;q24.1), in a patient with Asperger's disorder. This
translocation was inherited from his unaffected father, suggesting it might not
be pathogenic or it needs further hits to become pathogenic. In line with other
studies, our study revealed that subjects with sex chromosomal aneuploidy are
liable to neurodevelopmental disorders, including ASD, and conventional
karyotyping analysis is still a useful tool in detecting chromosomal
translocation in patients with ASD, given that array-based comparative genomic
hybridization technology can provide better resolution in detecting copy number
variations of genomic DNA.

(c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24132905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Bipolar Disord. 2013 Dec;15(8):893-8. doi: 10.1111/bdi.12125. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Reduced burden of very large and rare CNVs in bipolar affective disorder.

Grozeva D(1), Kirov G, Conrad DF, Barnes CP, Hurles M, Owen MJ, O'Donovan MC,
Craddock N.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff.

OBJECTIVES: Large, rare chromosomal copy number variants (CNVs) have been shown
to increase the risk for schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric disorders
including autism, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, learning
difficulties, and epilepsy. Their role in bipolar disorder (BD) is less clear.
There are no reports of an increase in large, rare CNVs in BD in general, but
some have reported an increase in early-onset cases. We previously found that the
rate of such CNVs in individuals with BD was not increased, even in early-onset
cases. Our aim here was to examine the rate of large rare CNVs in BD in
comparison with a new large independent reference sample from the same country.
METHODS: We studied the CNVs in a case-control sample consisting of 1,650 BD
cases (reported previously) and 10,259 reference individuals without a known
psychiatric disorder who took part in the original Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium (WTCCC) study. The 10,259 reference individuals were affected with six
non-psychiatric disorders (coronary artery disease, types 1 and 2 diabetes,
hypertension, Crohn's disease, and rheumatoid arthritis). Affymetrix 500K array
genotyping data were used to call the CNVs.
RESULTS: The rate of CNVs > 100 kb was not statistically different between cases 
and controls. The rate of very large (defined as > 1 Mb) and rare (< 1%) CNVs was
significantly lower in patients with BD compared with the reference group. CNV
loci associated with schizophrenia were not enriched in BD and, in fact, cases of
BD had the lowest number of such CNVs compared with any of the WTCCC cohorts;
this finding held even for the early-onset BD cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Schizophrenia and BD differ with respect to CNV burden and
association with specific CNVs. Our findings support the hypothesis that BD is
etiologically distinct from schizophrenia with respect to large, rare CNVs and
the accompanying associated neurodevelopmental abnormalities.

(c) 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24127788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2014 Jan;56(1):12-8. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12278. Epub 2013 Oct
1.

The genetic landscape of autism spectrum disorders.

Rosti RO(1), Sadek AA, Vaux KK, Gleeson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental 
disorders that show impaired communication and socialization, restricted
interests, and stereotypical behavioral patterns. Recent advances in molecular
medicine and high throughput screenings, such as array comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) and exome and whole genome sequencing, have revealed both
novel insights and new questions about the nature of this spectrum of disorders. 
What has emerged is a better understanding about the genetic architecture of
various genetic subtypes of ASD and correlations of genetic mutations with
specific autism subtypes. Based on this new information, we outline a strategy
for advancing diagnosis, prognosis, and counseling for patients and families.

(c) 2013 Mac Keith Press.

PMID: 24116704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(10):e1003823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003823. Epub 2013 Oct
3.

Both rare and de novo copy number variants are prevalent in agenesis of the
corpus callosum but not in cerebellar hypoplasia or polymicrogyria.

Sajan SA(1), Fernandez L, Nieh SE, Rider E, Bukshpun P, Wakahiro M, Christian SL,
Riviere JB, Sullivan CT, Sudi J, Herriges MJ, Paciorkowski AR, Barkovich AJ,
Glessner JT, Millen KJ, Hakonarson H, Dobyns WB, Sherr EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC), cerebellar hypoplasia (CBLH), and
polymicrogyria (PMG) are severe congenital brain malformations with largely
undiscovered causes. We conducted a large-scale chromosomal copy number variation
(CNV) discovery effort in 255 ACC, 220 CBLH, and 147 PMG patients, and 2,349
controls. Compared to controls, significantly more ACC, but unexpectedly not CBLH
or PMG patients, had rare genic CNVs over one megabase (p = 1.48x10-3; odds ratio
[OR] = 3.19; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.89-5.39). Rare genic CNVs were
those that impacted at least one gene in less than 1% of the combined population 
of patients and controls. Compared to controls, significantly more ACC but not
CBLH or PMG patients had rare CNVs impacting over 20 genes (p = 0.01; OR = 2.95; 
95% CI = 1.69-5.18). Independent qPCR confirmation showed that 9.4% of ACC
patients had de novo CNVs. These, in comparison to inherited CNVs, preferentially
overlapped de novo CNVs previously observed in patients with autism spectrum
disorders (p = 3.06x10-4; OR = 7.55; 95% CI = 2.40-23.72). Interestingly,
numerous reports have shown a reduced corpus callosum area in autistic patients, 
and diminished social and executive function in many ACC patients. We also
confirmed and refined previously known CNVs, including significantly narrowing
the 8p23.1-p11.1 duplication present in 2% of our current ACC cohort. We found
six novel CNVs, each in a single patient, that are likely deleterious: deletions 
of 1p31.3-p31.1, 1q31.2-q31.3, 5q23.1, and 15q11.2-q13.1; and duplications of
2q11.2-q13 and 11p14.3-p14.2. One ACC patient with microcephaly had a paternally 
inherited deletion of 16p13.11 that included NDE1. Exome sequencing identified a 
recessive maternally inherited nonsense mutation in the non-deleted allele of
NDE1, revealing the complexity of ACC genetics. This is the first systematic
study of CNVs in congenital brain malformations, and shows a much higher
prevalence of large gene-rich CNVs in ACC than in CBLH and PMG.

PMCID: PMC3789824
PMID: 24098143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Oct 3;93(4):607-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.09.001.

Identification of small exonic CNV from whole-exome sequence data and application
to autism spectrum disorder.

Poultney CS(1), Goldberg AP, Drapeau E, Kou Y, Harony-Nicolas H, Kajiwara Y, De
Rubeis S, Durand S, Stevens C, Rehnstrom K, Palotie A, Daly MJ, Ma'ayan A, Fromer
M, Buxbaum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Copy number variation (CNV) is an important determinant of human diversity and
plays important roles in susceptibility to disease. Most studies of CNV carried
out to date have made use of chromosome microarray and have had a lower size
limit for detection of about 30 kilobases (kb). With the emergence of whole-exome
sequencing studies, we asked whether such data could be used to reliably call
rare exonic CNV in the size range of 1-30 kilobases (kb), making use of the eXome
Hidden Markov Model (XHMM) program. By using both transmission information and
validation by molecular methods, we confirmed that small CNV encompassing as few 
as three exons can be reliably called from whole-exome data. We applied this
approach to an autism case-control sample (n = 811, mean per-target read depth = 
161) and observed a significant increase in the burden of rare (MAF [?]1%) 1-30 kb 
CNV, 1-30 kb deletions, and 1-10 kb deletions in ASD. CNV in the 1-30 kb range
frequently hit just a single gene, and we were therefore able to carry out
enrichment and pathway analyses, where we observed enrichment for disruption of
genes in cytoskeletal and autophagy pathways in ASD. In summary, our results
showed that XHMM provided an effective means to assess small exonic CNV from
whole-exome data, indicated that rare 1-30 kb exonic deletions could contribute
to risk in up to 7% of individuals with ASD, and implicated a candidate pathway
in developmental delay syndromes.

Copyright (c) 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791269
PMID: 24094742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2013;113(8):46-9.

[Genomic abnormalities in children with mental retardation and autism: the use of
comparative genomic hybridization in situ (HRCGH) and molecular karyotyping with 
DNA-microchips (array CGH)].

[Article in Russian]

Vorsanova SG(1), Iurov IIu, Kurinnaia OS, Voinova VIu, Iurov IuB.

Author information: 
(1)Nauchnyi tsentr psikhicheskogo zdorov'ia RAMN, Moskva; Moskovskii NII
pediatrii i detskoi khirurgii Minzdrava RF, Moskva; Moskovskii gorodskoi
psikhologo-pedagogicheskii universitet, Moskva.

Genomic abnormalities occur with high frequency in children with mental
retardation and autistic spectrum disorders (ADS). Molecular karyotyping using
DNA microarrays is a new technology for diagnosis of genomic and chromosomal
abnormalities in autism implemented in the fields of biological psychiatry and
medical genetics. We carried out a comparative analysis of the frequency and
spectrum of genome abnormalities in children with mental retardation and autism
of unknown etiology using high-resolution comparative genomic methods for
hybridization (HRCGH) and molecular karyotyping (array CGH). In a study of 100
children with autism, learning difficulties and congenital malformations by
HRCGH, we identified genomic rearrangements in 46% of cases. Using array CGH we
examined 50 children with autism. In 44 cases out of 50 (88%), different genomic 
abnormalities and genomic variations (CNV - copy number variations) were
identified. Unbalanced genomic rearrangements, including deletions and
duplications, were found in 23 cases out of 44 (52%). These data suggest that
genomic abnormalities which are not detectable by common methods of chromosome
analysis are often discovered by molecular cytogenetic techniques in children
autism spectrum disorders. In addition, 54 children with idiopathic mental
retardation and congenital malformations (31 boys and 23 girls) without autism
spectrum disorders were examined using molecular karyotyping and microarray
containing an increased number of DNA samples for genomic loci of chromosome X.
Deletions and duplications affecting different regions of the chromosome X were
detected in 11 out of 54 children (20.4%).

PMID: 24077551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1405-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2776. Epub 2013 Sep 29.

Truncating mutations of MAGEL2 cause Prader-Willi phenotypes and autism.

Schaaf CP(1), Gonzalez-Garay ML, Xia F, Potocki L, Gripp KW, Zhang B, Peters BA, 
McElwain MA, Drmanac R, Beaudet AL, Caskey CT, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA. [2] Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute,
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA. [3].

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is caused by the absence of paternally expressed,
maternally silenced genes at 15q11-q13. We report four individuals with
truncating mutations on the paternal allele of MAGEL2, a gene within the PWS
domain. The first subject was ascertained by whole-genome sequencing analysis for
PWS features. Three additional subjects were identified by reviewing the results 
of exome sequencing of 1,248 cases in a clinical laboratory. All four subjects
had autism spectrum disorder (ASD), intellectual disability and a varying degree 
of clinical and behavioral features of PWS. These findings suggest that MAGEL2 is
a new gene causing complex ASD and that MAGEL2 loss of function can contribute to
several aspects of the PWS phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3819162
PMID: 24076603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Oct 3;93(4):595-606. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.07.024. Epub
2013 Sep 12.

Transmission disequilibrium of small CNVs in simplex autism.

Krumm N(1), O'Roak BJ, Karakoc E, Mohajeri K, Nelson B, Vives L, Jacquemont S,
Munson J, Bernier R, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

We searched for disruptive, genic rare copy-number variants (CNVs) among 411
families affected by sporadic autism spectrum disorder (ASD) from the Simons
Simplex Collection by using available exome sequence data and CoNIFER (Copy
Number Inference from Exome Reads). Compared to high-density SNP microarrays, our
approach yielded [?]2x more smaller genic rare CNVs. We found that affected
probands inherited more CNVs than did their siblings (453 versus 394, p = 0.004; 
odds ratio [OR] = 1.19) and that the probands' CNVs affected more genes (921
versus 726, p = 0.02; OR = 1.30). These smaller CNVs (median size 18 kb) were
transmitted preferentially from the mother (136 maternal versus 100 paternal, p =
0.02), although this bias occurred irrespective of affected status. The excess
burden of inherited CNVs among probands was driven primarily by sibling pairs
with discordant social-behavior phenotypes (p < 0.0002, measured by Social
Responsiveness Scale [SRS] score), which contrasts with families where the
phenotypes were more closely matched or less extreme (p > 0.5). Finally, we found
enrichment of brain-expressed genes unique to probands, especially in the
SRS-discordant group (p = 0.0035). In a combined model, our inherited CNVs, de
novo CNVs, and de novo single-nucleotide variants all independently contributed
to the risk of autism (p < 0.05). Taken together, these results suggest that
small transmitted rare CNVs play a role in the etiology of simplex autism.
Importantly, the small size of these variants aids in the identification of
specific genes as additional risk factors associated with ASD.

Copyright (c) 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3791263
PMID: 24035194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2013 Oct;22(4):675-87. doi:
10.1016/j.chc.2013.06.004. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Genetics of childhood-onset schizophrenia.

Asarnow RF(1), Forsyth JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California 
at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA; Department of Psychology, University 
of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA. Electronic address:
rasarnow@mednet.ucla.edu.

Schizophrenia is a heritable disorder. The genetic architecture of schizophrenia 
is complex and heterogeneous. This article discusses genetic studies of
childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) and compares findings in familial
aggregation, common allele, and rare allele studies of COS with those for
adult-onset schizophrenia (AOS). COS seems to be a rare variant of AOS with
greater familial aggregation of schizophrenia spectrum disorders and higher
occurrence of rare allelic variants. The usefulness of genetic screening for
diagnosis and individualized treatment is limited; however, identifying common
pathways through which multiple genes adversely affect neural systems offers
great promise toward developing novel pharmacologic interventions.

Copyright (c) 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4364758
PMID: 24012080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Transl Psychiatry. 2013 Sep 3;3:e299. doi: 10.1038/tp.2013.68.

Alterations in mitochondrial DNA copy number and the activities of electron
transport chain complexes and pyruvate dehydrogenase in the frontal cortex from
subjects with autism.

Gu F(1), Chauhan V, Kaur K, Brown WT, LaFauci G, Wegiel J, Chauhan A.

Author information: 
(1)NYS Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island,
NY, USA.

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder associated with social deficits and
behavioral abnormalities. Recent evidence suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction
and oxidative stress may contribute to the etiology of autism. This is the first 
study to compare the activities of mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC)
complexes (I-V) and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), as well as mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) copy number in the frontal cortex tissues from autistic and age-matched
control subjects. The activities of complexes I, V and PDH were most affected in 
autism (n=14) being significantly reduced by 31%, 36% and 35%, respectively. When
99% confidence interval (CI) of control group was taken as a reference range,
impaired activities of complexes I, III and V were observed in 43%, 29% and 43%
of autistic subjects, respectively. Reduced activities of all five ETC complexes 
were observed in 14% of autistic cases, and the activities of multiple complexes 
were decreased in 29% of autistic subjects. These results suggest that defects in
complexes I and III (sites of mitochondrial free radical generation) and complex 
V (adenosine triphosphate synthase) are more prevalent in autism. PDH activity
was also reduced in 57% of autistic subjects. The ratios of mtDNA of three
mitochondrial genes ND1, ND4 and Cyt B (that encode for subunits of complexes I
and III) to nuclear DNA were significantly increased in autism, suggesting a
higher mtDNA copy number in autism. Compared with the 95% CI of the control
group, 44% of autistic children showed higher copy numbers of all three
mitochondrial genes examined. Furthermore, ND4 and Cyt B deletions were observed 
in 44% and 33% of autistic children, respectively. This study indicates that
autism is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction in the brain.

PMCID: PMC3784762
PMID: 24002085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):351-60. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.07.019.
Epub 2013 Aug 28.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome as a window into complex neuropsychiatric disorders
over the lifespan.

Jonas RK(1), Montojo CA(2), Bearden CE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. (2)Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California-Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California; Department of Psychology, University of California-Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California. (3)Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human
Behavior, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California;
Department of Psychology, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California. Electronic address: cbearden@mednet.ucla.edu.

Evidence is rapidly accumulating that rare, recurrent copy number variants
represent large effect risk factors for neuropsychiatric disorders. 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (22q11DS) (velocardiofacial syndrome or DiGeorge syndrome) is
the most common known contiguous gene deletion syndrome and is associated with
diverse neuropsychiatric disorders across the life span. One of the most
intriguing aspects of the syndrome is the variability in clinical and cognitive
presentation: children with 22q11DS have high prevalence of autism spectrum,
attention deficit, and anxiety disorders, as well as psychotic-like features, and
up to 30% of adolescents and adults develop schizophrenia-like psychosis.
Recently, cases of early-onset Parkinson's disease in adults have been reported, 
collectively suggesting a role for disrupted dopaminergic neurotransmission in
the observed neuropsychiatric phenotypes. There is also some evidence that
22q11DS-associated autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia represent two
unrelated phenotypic manifestations, consistent with a neuropsychiatric
pleiotropy model. This genetic lesion thus provides a unique model for the
discovery of specific genomic risk and (potentially) protective factors for
neuropsychiatric disease. Here, we provide an overview of neuropsychiatric
findings to date, which highlight the value of this syndrome in mapping the
developmental trajectory of dimensional phenotypes that traverse multiple
diagnostic categories. Potential sources of genetic variability that may
contribute to the disorder's heterogeneous presentation are reviewed. Because of 
its known genetic etiology, animal models can readily be developed that
recapitulate specific aspects of the syndrome. Future research directions involve
translational models and potential for drug screenable targets in the context of 
this human model system.

Copyright (c) 2014 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3875621
PMID: 23992925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):378-85. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.07.022.
Epub 2013 Aug 28.

The penetrance of copy number variations for schizophrenia and developmental
delay.

Kirov G(1), Rees E(2), Walters JT(2), Escott-Price V(2), Georgieva L(2), Richards
AL(2), Chambert KD(3), Davies G(2), Legge SE(2), Moran JL(3), McCarroll SA(2),
O'Donovan MC(2), Owen MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics,
Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Electronic address: kirov@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics,
Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. (3)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, 
The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):344-5.

BACKGROUND: Several recurrent copy number variants (CNVs) have been shown to
increase the risk of developing schizophrenia (SCZ), developmental delay (DD),
autism spectrum disorders (ASD), and various congenital malformations (CM). Their
penetrance for SCZ has been estimated to be modest. However, comparisons between 
their penetrance for SCZ or DD/ASD/CM, or estimates of the total penetrance for
any of these disorders have not yet been made.
METHODS: We use data from the largest available studies on SCZ and DD/ASD/CM,
including a new sample of 6882 cases and 6316 controls, to estimate the
frequencies of 70 implicated CNVs in carriers with these disorders, healthy
control subjects, and the general population. On the basis of these frequencies, 
we estimate their penetrance. We also estimate the strength of the selection
pressure against CNVs and correlate this against their overall penetrance.
RESULTS: The rates of nearly all CNVs are higher in DD/ASD/CM compared with SCZ. 
The penetrance of CNVs is at least several times higher for the development of a 
disorder from the group of DD/ASD/CM. The overall penetrance of SCZ-associated
CNVs for developing any disorder is high, ranging between 10.6% and 100%.
CONCLUSIONS: CNVs associated with SCZ have high pathogenicity. The majority of
the increased risk conferred by CNVs is toward the development of an
earlier-onset disorder, such as DD/ASD/CM, rather than SCZ. The penetrance of
CNVs correlates strongly with their selection coefficients. The improved
estimates of penetrance will provide crucial information for genetic counselling.

Copyright (c) 2014 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4229045
PMID: 23992924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 26;8(8):e72381. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072381. eCollection
2013.

Genome-wide copy number variation in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in
the Turkish population: deletion of EPHA3 is a possible protective factor.

Uyan O(1), Omur O, Agim ZS, Ozoguz A, Li H, Parman Y, Deymeer F, Oflazer P, Koc
F, Tan E, Ozcelik H, Basak AN.

Author information: 
(1)Suna and Inan Kirac Foundation Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory,
Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey.

The genome-wide presence of copy number variations (CNVs), which was shown to
affect the expression and function of genes, has been recently suggested to
confer risk for various human disorders, including Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
(ALS). We have performed a genome-wide CNV analysis using PennCNV tool and 733K
GWAS data of 117 Turkish ALS patients and 109 matched healthy controls.
Case-control association analyses have implicated the presence of both common
(>5%) and rare (<5%) CNVs in the Turkish population. In the framework of this
study, we identified several common and rare loci that may have an impact on ALS 
pathogenesis. None of the CNVs associated has been implicated in ALS before, but 
some have been reported in different types of cancers and autism. The most
significant associations were shown for 41 kb and 15 kb intergenic heterozygous
deletions (Chr11: 50,545,009-50,586,426 and Chr19: 20,860,930-20,875,787) both
contributing to increased risk for ALS. CNVs in coding regions of the MAP4K3,
HLA-B, EPHA3 and DPYD genes were detected however, after validation by Log R
Ratio (LRR) values and TaqMan CNV genotyping, only EPHA3 deletion remained as a
potential protective factor for ALS (p = 0.0065024). Based on the knowledge that 
EPHA4 has been previously shown to rescue SOD1 transgenic mice from ALS phenotype
and prolongs survival, EPHA3 may be a promising candidate for therepuetic
interventions.

PMCID: PMC3753249
PMID: 23991104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Nov;18(11):1178-84. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.98. Epub 2013 Aug
13.

Detecting large copy number variants using exome genotyping arrays in a large
Swedish schizophrenia sample.

Szatkiewicz JP(1), Neale BM, O'Dushlaine C, Fromer M, Goldstein JI, Moran JL,
Chambert K, Kahler A, Magnusson PK, Hultman CM, Sklar P, Purcell S, McCarroll SA,
Sullivan PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Although copy number variants (CNVs) are important in genomic medicine, CNVs have
not been systematically assessed for many complex traits. Several large rare CNVs
increase risk for schizophrenia (SCZ) and autism and often demonstrate
pleiotropic effects; however, their frequencies in the general population and
other complex traits are unknown. Genotyping large numbers of samples is
essential for progress. Large cohorts from many different diseases are being
genotyped using exome-focused arrays designed to detect uncommon or rare
protein-altering sequence variation. Although these arrays were not designed for 
CNV detection, the hybridization intensity data generated in each experiment
could, in principle, be used for gene-focused CNV analysis. Our goal was to
evaluate the extent to which CNVs can be detected using data from one particular 
exome array (the Illumina Human Exome Bead Chip). We genotyped 9100 Swedish
subjects (3962 cases with SCZ and 5138 controls) using both standard genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) and exome arrays. In comparison with CNVs detected using
GWAS arrays, we observed high sensitivity and specificity for detecting genic
CNVs [?] 400 kb including known pathogenic CNVs along with replicating the
literature finding that cases with SCZ had greater enrichment for genic CNVs. Our
data confirm the association of SCZ with 16p11.2 duplications and 22q11.2
deletions, and suggest a novel association with deletions at 11q12.2. Our results
suggest the utility of exome-focused arrays in surveying large genic CNVs in very
large samples; and thereby open the door for new opportunities such as conducting
well-powered CNV assessment and comparisons between different diseases. The use
of a single platform also minimizes potential confounding factors that could
impact accurate detection.

PMCID: PMC3966073
PMID: 23938935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Nov;18(11):1153-65. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.92. Epub 2013 Aug
6.

Copy number variation at 22q11.2: from rare variants to common mechanisms of
developmental neuropsychiatric disorders.

Hiroi N(1), Takahashi T, Hishimoto A, Izumi T, Boku S, Hiramoto T.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA [2] Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA [3] Department of Genetics,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

Recently discovered genome-wide rare copy number variants (CNVs) have
unprecedented levels of statistical association with many developmental
neuropsychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders,
intellectual disability and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. However, as
CNVs often include multiple genes, causal genes responsible for CNV-associated
diagnoses and traits are still poorly understood. Mouse models of CNVs are in use
to delve into the precise mechanisms through which CNVs contribute to disorders
and associated traits. Based on human and mouse model studies on rare CNVs within
human chromosome 22q11.2, we propose that alterations of a distinct set of
multiple, noncontiguous genes encoded in this chromosomal region, in concert with
modulatory impacts of genetic background and environmental factors, variably
shift the probabilities of phenotypes along a predetermined developmental
trajectory. This model can be further extended to the study of other CNVs and may
serve as a guide to help characterize the impact of genes in developmental
neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC3852900
PMID: 23917946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Syndromol. 2013 Jun;4(5):213-26. doi: 10.1159/000350041. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Towards identification of individual etiologies by resolving genomic and
biological conundrums in patients with autism spectrum disorders.

Poot M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Recent genomic research into autism spectrum disorders (ASD) has revealed a
remarkably complex genetic architecture. Large numbers of common variants, copy
number variations and single nucleotide variants have been identified, yet each
of them individually afforded only a small phenotypic impact. A polygenic model
in which multiple genes interact either in an additive or a synergistic way
appears the most plausible for the majority of ASD patients. Based on recently
identified ASD candidate genes, transgenic mouse models for
neuroligins/neurorexins and genes such as Cntnap2, Cntn5, Tsc1, Tsc2, Akt3,
Cyfip1, Scn1a, En2, Slc6a4, and Bckdk have been generated and studied with
respect to behavioral and neuroanatomical phenotypes and sensitivity to drug
treatments. From these models, a few clues for potential pharmacologic
intervention emerged. The Fmr1, Shank2 and Cntn5 knockout mice exhibited
alterations of glutamate receptors, which may become a target for pharmacologic
modulation. Some of the phenotypes of Mecp2 knockout mice can be ameliorated by
administering IGF1. In the near future, comprehensive genotyping of individual
patients and siblings combined with the novel insights generated from the
transgenic animal studies may provide us with personalized treatment options.
Eventually, autism may indeed turn out to be a phenotypically heterogeneous group
of disorders ('autisms') caused by combinations of changes in multiple possible
candidate genes, being different in each patient and requiring for each
combination of mutations a distinct, individually tailored treatment.

PMCID: PMC3711481
PMID: 23885228  [PubMed]


27. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jul 24;14:499. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-499.

Identification of candidate intergenic risk loci in autism spectrum disorder.

Walker S(1), Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Centre for Applied Genomics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Copy number variations (CNVs) and DNA sequence alterations affecting 
specific neuronal genes are established risk factors for Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD). In what is largely considered a genetic condition, so far, these mutations
account for ~20% of individuals having an ASD diagnosis. However, non-coding
genomic sequence also contains functional elements introducing additional disease
risk loci for investigation.
RESULTS: We have performed genome-wide analyses and identified rare inherited
CNVs affecting non-genic intervals in 41 of 1491 (3%) of ASD cases examined.
Examples of such intergenic CNV regions include 16q21 and 2p16.3 near known ASD
risk genes CDH8 and NRXN1 respectively, as well as novel loci contiguous with
ZHX2, MOCS1, LRRC4C, SEMA3C, and other genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Rare variants in intergenic regions may implicate new risk loci and 
genes in ASD and also present useful data for comparison with coming whole genome
sequence datasets.

PMCID: PMC3734099
PMID: 23879678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2013;14:191-213. doi:
10.1146/annurev-genom-091212-153431. Epub 2013 Jul 22.

The genetic landscapes of autism spectrum disorders.

Huguet G(1), Ey E, Bourgeron T.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics and Cognitive Functions Unit, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris,
France; email: thomasb@pasteur.fr.

The autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are characterized by impairments in social
interaction and stereotyped behaviors. For the majority of individuals with ASD, 
the causes of the disorder remain unknown; however, in up to 25% of cases, a
genetic cause can be identified. Chromosomal rearrangements as well as rare and
de novo copy-number variants are present in [?]10-20% of individuals with ASD,
compared with 1-2% in the general population and/or unaffected siblings. Rare and
de novo coding-sequence mutations affecting neuronal genes have also been
identified in [?]5-10% of individuals with ASD. Common variants such as
single-nucleotide polymorphisms seem to contribute to ASD susceptibility, but,
taken individually, their effects appear to be small. Despite a heterogeneous
genetic landscape, the genes implicated thus far-which are involved in chromatin 
remodeling, metabolism, mRNA translation, and synaptic function-seem to converge 
in common pathways affecting neuronal and synaptic homeostasis. Animal models
developed to study these genes should lead to a better understanding of the
diversity of the genetic landscapes of ASD.

PMID: 23875794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 1;75(5):371-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.05.040.
Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Reciprocal duplication of the Williams-Beuren syndrome deletion on chromosome
7q11.23 is associated with schizophrenia.

Mulle JG(1), Pulver AE(2), McGrath JA(3), Wolyniec PS(3), Dodd AF(4), Cutler
DJ(5), Sebat J(6), Malhotra D(7), Nestadt G(3), Conrad DF(8), Hurles M(8), Barnes
CP(9), Ikeda M(10), Iwata N(10), Levinson DF(11), Gejman PV(12), Sanders AR(12), 
Duan J(12), Mitchell AA(13), Peter I(14), Sklar P(15), O'Dushlaine CT(16),
Grozeva D(17), O'Donovan MC(17), Owen MJ(17), Hultman CM(18), Kahler AK(19),
Sullivan PF(20); Molecular Genetics of Schizophrenia Consortium, Kirov G(17),
Warren ST(21).

Collaborators: Levinson DF, Duan J, Oh S, Wang K, Sanders AR, Shi J, Zhang N,
Mowry BJ, Olincy A, Amin F, Cloninger CR, Silverman JM, Buccola NG, Byerley WF,
Black DW, Kendler KS, Freedman R, Dudbridge F, Pe'er I, Hakonarson H, Bergen SE, 
Fanous AH, Holmans PA, Gejman PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University;
Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia. Electronic address: jmulle@emory.edu. (2)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine; Department of
Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine. (4)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University. (5)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia. (6)Beyster Center for Genomics of
Psychiatric Diseases; Department of PsychiatryUniversity of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California; Department of Cellular Molecular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California; Institute
for Genomic Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California. 
(7)Beyster Center for Genomics of Psychiatric Diseases; Department of
PsychiatryUniversity of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California. (8)The
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge. (9)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College
London, London, United Kingdom. (10)Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Toyake, Aichi, Japan. (11)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Stanford University, Stanford, California. (12)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(13)Department of Forensic Biology, Office of Chief Medical Examiner of the City 
of New York. (14)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, New York. (15)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics 
Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; Division of Psychiatric Genomics, Department of
Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York. (16)Psychiatric
and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston;
Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (17)Department
of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(18)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. (19)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Departments of Genetics and Psychiatry,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Division of Mental
Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (20)Departments of 
Genetics and Psychiatry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina. (21)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia; Departments of Biochemistry and Pediatrics, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.

BACKGROUND: Several copy number variants (CNVs) have been implicated as
susceptibility factors for schizophrenia (SZ). Some of these same CNVs also
increase risk for autism spectrum disorders, suggesting an etiologic overlap
between these conditions. Recently, de novo duplications of a region on
chromosome 7q11.23 were associated with autism spectrum disorders. The reciprocal
deletion of this region causes Williams-Beuren syndrome.
METHODS: We assayed an Ashkenazi Jewish cohort of 554 SZ cases and 1014 controls 
for genome-wide CNV. An excess of large rare and de novo CNVs were observed,
including a 1.4 Mb duplication on chromosome 7q11.23 identified in two unrelated 
patients. To test whether this 7q11.23 duplication is also associated with SZ, we
obtained data for 14,387 SZ cases and 28,139 controls from seven additional
studies with high-resolution genome-wide CNV detection. We performed a
meta-analysis, correcting for study population of origin, to assess whether the
duplication is associated with SZ.
RESULTS: We found duplications at 7q11.23 in 11 of 14,387 SZ cases with only 1 in
28,139 control subjects (unadjusted odds ratio 21.52, 95% confidence interval:
3.13-922.6, p value 5.5 x 10(-5); adjusted odds ratio 10.8, 95% confidence
interval: 1.46-79.62, p value .007). Of three SZ duplication carriers with
detailed retrospective data, all showed social anxiety and language delay
premorbid to SZ onset, consistent with both human studies and animal models of
the 7q11.23 duplication.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a new CNV associated with SZ. Reciprocal
duplication of the Williams-Beuren syndrome deletion at chromosome 7q11.23
confers an approximately tenfold increase in risk for SZ.

Copyright (c) 2014 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3838485
PMID: 23871472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e66707. Print 2013.

Prioritization of Copy Number Variation Loci Associated with Autism from AutDB-An
Integrative Multi-Study Genetic Database.

Menashe I(1), Larsen EC, Banerjee-Basu S.

Author information: 
(1)MindSpec, McLean, Virginia, United States of America ; Department of Public
Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev,
Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are thought to play an important role in the
predisposition to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, their relatively low
frequency and widespread genomic distribution complicates their accurate
characterization and utilization for clinical genetics purposes. Here we present 
a comprehensive analysis of multi-study, genome-wide CNV data from AutDB
(http://mindspec.org/autdb.html), a genetic database that accommodates detailed
annotations of published scientific reports of CNVs identified in ASD
individuals. Overall, we evaluated 4,926 CNVs in 2,373 ASD subjects from 48
scientific reports, encompassing [?]2.12x10(9) bp of genomic data. Remarkable
variation was seen in CNV size, with duplications being significantly larger than
deletions, (P  =  3x10(-105); Wilcoxon rank sum test). Examination of the CNV
burden across the genome revealed 11 loci with a significant excess of CNVs among
ASD subjects (P<7x10(-7)). Altogether, these loci covered 15,610 kb of the genome
and contained 166 genes. Remarkable variation was seen both in locus size (20 -
4950 kb), and gene content, with seven multigenic ([?]3 genes) and four monogenic
loci. CNV data from control populations was used to further refine the boundaries
of these ASD susceptibility loci. Interestingly, our analysis indicates that
15q11.2-13.3, a genomic region prone to chromosomal rearrangements of various
sizes, contains three distinct ASD susceptibility CNV loci that vary in their
genomic boundaries, CNV types, inheritance patterns, and overlap with CNVs from
control populations. In summary, our analysis of AutDB CNV data provides valuable
insights into the genomic characteristics of ASD susceptibility CNV loci and
could therefore be utilized in various clinical settings and facilitate future
genetic research of this disorder.

PMCID: PMC3688962
PMID: 23825557  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Nov 15;22(22):4485-501. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt297. Epub 2013
Jun 27.

Pathogenic rare copy number variants in community-based schizophrenia suggest a
potential role for clinical microarrays.

Costain G(1), Lionel AC, Merico D, Forsythe P, Russell K, Lowther C, Yuen T,
Husted J, Stavropoulos DJ, Speevak M, Chow EW, Marshall CR, Scherer SW, Bassett
AS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Research Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 2S1.

Individually rare, large copy number variants (CNVs) contribute to genetic
vulnerability for schizophrenia. Unresolved questions remain, however, regarding 
the anticipated yield of clinical microarray testing in schizophrenia. Using
high-resolution genome-wide microarrays and rigorous methods, we investigated
rare CNVs in a prospectively recruited community-based cohort of 459 unrelated
adults with schizophrenia and estimated the minimum prevalence of clinically
significant CNVs that would be detectable on a clinical microarray. A blinded
review by two independent clinical cytogenetic laboratory directors of all large 
(>500 kb) rare CNVs in cases and well-matched controls showed that those deemed
to be clinically significant were highly enriched in schizophrenia (16.4-fold
increase, P < 0.0001). In a single community catchment area, the prevalence of
individuals with these CNVs was 8.1%. Rare 1.7 Mb CNVs at 2q13 were found to be
significantly associated with schizophrenia for the first time, compared with the
prevalence in 23 838 population-based controls (42.9-fold increase, P = 0.0002). 
Additional novel findings that will facilitate the future clinical interpretation
of smaller CNVs in schizophrenia include: (i) a greater proportion of individuals
with two or more rare exonic CNVs >10 kb in size (1.5-fold increase, P = 0.0109) 
in schizophrenia; (ii) the systematic discovery of new candidate genes for
schizophrenia; and, (iii) functional gene enrichment mapping highlighting a
differential impact in schizophrenia of rare exonic deletions involving diverse
functions, including neurodevelopmental and synaptic processes (4.7-fold
increase, P = 0.0060). These findings suggest consideration of a potential role
for clinical microarray testing in schizophrenia, as is now the suggested
standard of care for related developmental disorders like autism.

PMCID: PMC3889806
PMID: 23813976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 21;8(6):e66729. Print 2013.

Comparison of Genomic and Epigenomic Expression in Monozygotic Twins Discordant
for Rett Syndrome.

Miyake K(1), Yang C, Minakuchi Y, Ohori K, Soutome M, Hirasawa T, Kazuki Y,
Adachi N, Suzuki S, Itoh M, Goto YI, Andoh T, Kurosawa H, Oshimura M, Sasaki M,
Toyoda A, Kubota T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenetic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Interdisciplinary
Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo,
Japan.

Monozygotic (identical) twins have been widely used in genetic studies to
determine the relative contributions of heredity and the environment in human
diseases. Discordance in disease manifestation between affected monozygotic twins
has been attributed to either environmental factors or different patterns of X
chromosome inactivation (XCI). However, recent studies have identified genetic
and epigenetic differences between monozygotic twins, thereby challenging the
accepted experimental model for distinguishing the effects of nature and nurture.
Here, we report the genomic and epigenomic sequences in skin fibroblasts of a
discordant monozygotic twin pair with Rett syndrome, an X-linked
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by autistic features, epileptic
seizures, gait ataxia and stereotypical hand movements. The twins shared the same
de novo mutation in exon 4 of the MECP2 gene (G269AfsX288), which was paternal in
origin and occurred during spermatogenesis. The XCI patterns in the twins did not
differ in lymphocytes, skin fibroblasts, and hair cells (which originate from
ectoderm as does neuronal tissue). No reproducible differences were detected
between the twins in single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertion-deletion
polymorphisms (indels), or copy number variations. Differences in DNA methylation
between the twins were detected in fibroblasts in the upstream regions of genes
involved in brain function and skeletal tissues such as Mohawk Homeobox (MKX),
Brain-type Creatine Kinase (CKB), and FYN Tyrosine Kinase Protooncogene (FYN).
The level of methylation in these upstream regions was inversely correlated with 
the level of gene expression. Thus, differences in DNA methylation patterns
likely underlie the discordance in Rett phenotypes between the twins.

PMCID: PMC3689680
PMID: 23805272  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Aug 15;251:95-112. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.06.012. Epub
2013 Jun 13.

Autism genetics.

Persico AM(1), Napolioni V.

Author information: 
(1)Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry Unit, University Campus Bio-Medico, Rome,
Italy. a.persico@unicampus.it

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a severe neuropsychiatric disease with strong
genetic underpinnings. However, genetic contributions to autism are extremely
heterogeneous, with many different loci underlying the disease to a different
extent in different individuals. Moreover, the phenotypic expression (i.e.,
"penetrance") of these genetic components is also highly variable, ranging from
fully penetrant point mutations to polygenic forms with multiple gene-gene and
gene-environment interactions. Furthermore, many genes involved in ASD are also
involved in intellectual disability, further underscoring their lack of
specificity in phenotypic expression. We shall hereby review current knowledge on
the genetic basis of ASD, spanning genetic/genomic syndromes associated with
autism, monogenic forms due to copy number variants (CNVs) or rare point
mutations, mitochondrial forms, and polygenic autisms. Finally, the recent
contributions of genome-wide association and whole exome sequencing studies will 
be highlighted.

Copyright (c) 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23769996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genet Med. 2014 Jan;16(1):70-7. doi: 10.1038/gim.2013.78. Epub 2013 Jun 13.

Diagnostic yield of array comparative genomic hybridization in adults with autism
spectrum disorders.

Stobbe G(1), Liu Y(2), Wu R(3), Hudgings LH(4), Thompson O(5), Hisama FM(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
[2] Department of Psychiatry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. (4)Department of Family Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA. (5)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (6)1] Department of Neurology, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA [2] Division of Medical Genetics, Department
of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

PURPOSE: Array comparative genomic hybridization is available for the evaluation 
of autism spectrum disorders. The diagnostic yield of testing is 5-18% in
children with developmental disabilities, including autism spectrum disorders and
multiple congenital anomalies. The yield of array comparative genomic
hybridization in the adult autism spectrum disorder population is unknown.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review for 40 consecutive patients
referred for genetic evaluation of autism from July 2009 through April 2012. Four
pediatric patients were excluded. Medical history and prior testing were
reviewed. Clinical genetic evaluation and testing were offered to all patients.
RESULTS: The study population comprised 36 patients (age range 18-45, mean 25.3
years). An autism spectrum disorder diagnosis was confirmed in 34 of 36 patients 
by medical record review. One patient had had an abnormal karyotype; none had
prior array comparative genomic hybridization testing. Of the 23 patients with
autism who underwent array comparative genomic hybridization, 2 of 23 (8.7%) had 
pathogenic or presumed pathogenic abnormalities and 2 of 23 (8.7%) had likely
pathogenic copy-number variants. An additional 5 of 23 (22%) of autism patients
had variants of uncertain significance without subclassification.
CONCLUSION: Including one patient newly diagnosed with fragile X syndrome, our
data showed abnormal or likely pathogenic findings in 5 of 24 (21%) adult autism 
patients. Genetic reevaluation in adult autism patients is warranted.

PMID: 23765050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Clin Bioinforma. 2013 Jun 11;3(1):12. doi: 10.1186/2043-9113-3-12.

Multiple samples aCGH analysis for rare CNVs detection.

Sykulski M(1), Gambin T, Bartnik M, Derwinska K, Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik B,
Stankiewicz P, Gambin A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
aniag@mimuw.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: DNA copy number variations (CNV) constitute an important source of
genetic variability. The standard method used for CNV detection is array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).
RESULTS: We propose a novel multiple sample aCGH analysis methodology aiming in
rare CNVs detection. In contrast to the majority of previous approaches, which
deal with cancer datasets, we focus on constitutional genomic abnormalities
identified in a diverse spectrum of diseases in human. Our method is tested on
exon targeted aCGH array of 366 patients affected with developmental
delay/intellectual disability, epilepsy, or autism. The proposed algorithms can
be applied as a post-processing filtering to any given segmentation method.
CONCLUSIONS: Thanks to the additional information obtained from multiple samples,
we could efficiently detect significant segments corresponding to rare CNVs
responsible for pathogenic changes. The robust statistical framework applied in
our method enables to eliminate the influence of widespread technical artifact
termed 'waves'.

PMCID: PMC3691624
PMID: 23758813  [PubMed]


36. Transl Psychiatry. 2013 Jun 11;3:e270. doi: 10.1038/tp.2013.48.

AKAPs integrate genetic findings for autism spectrum disorders.

Poelmans G(1), Franke B, Pauls DL, Glennon JC, Buitelaar JK.

Author information: 
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. g.poelmans@donders.ru.nl

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are highly heritable, and six genome-wide
association studies (GWASs) of ASDs have been published to date. In this study,
we have integrated the findings from these GWASs with other genetic data to
identify enriched genetic networks that are associated with ASDs. We conducted
bioinformatics and systematic literature analyses of 200 top-ranked ASD candidate
genes from five published GWASs. The sixth GWAS was used for replication and
validation of our findings. Further corroborating evidence was obtained through
rare genetic variant studies, that is, exome sequencing and copy number variation
(CNV) studies, and/or other genetic evidence, including candidate gene
association, microRNA and gene expression, gene function and genetic animal
studies. We found three signaling networks regulating steroidogenesis, neurite
outgrowth and (glutamatergic) synaptic function to be enriched in the data. Most 
genes from the five GWASs were also implicated--independent of gene size--in ASDs
by at least one other line of genomic evidence. Importantly, A-kinase anchor
proteins (AKAPs) functionally integrate signaling cascades within and between
these networks. The three identified protein networks provide an important
contribution to increasing our understanding of the molecular basis of ASDs. In
addition, our results point towards the AKAPs as promising targets for developing
novel ASD treatments.

PMCID: PMC3693406
PMID: 23756379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2013 Jun;34(5):379-81. doi: 10.1097/DBP.0b013e318294c958.

Cancer and copy number variants in an autism diagnostic clinic.

Gannon WT, Martinez JE, Anderson SJ, Swingle HM.

PMID: 23751890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Paediatr Child Health. 2013 Sep;49(9):716-24. doi: 10.1111/jpc.12256. Epub 2013
Jun 3.

High resolution chromosomal microarray in undiagnosed neurological disorders.

Howell KB(1), Kornberg AJ, Harvey AS, Ryan MM, Mackay MT, Freeman JL, Rodriguez
Casero MV, Collins KJ, Hayman M, Mohamed A, Ware TL, Clark D, Bruno DL, Burgess
T, Slater H, McGillivray G, Leventer RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

AIM: Despite advances in medical investigation, many children with neurological
conditions remain without a diagnosis, although a genetic aetiology is often
suspected. Chromosomal microarray (CMA) screens for copy number variants (CNVs)
and long continuous stretches of homozygosity (LCSH) and may further enhance
diagnostic yield. Although recent studies have identified pathogenic CNVs in
intellectual disability, autism and epilepsy, the utility of CMA testing in a
broader cohort of children with neurologic disorders has not been reported.
METHODS: Two hundred fifteen patients with neurological conditions of unknown
aetiology were seen over a 6-month period and were prospectively tested by CMA
using high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarrays (Illumina 
HumanCytoSNP-12 v2.1 or Affymetrix 2.7M).
RESULTS: Thirty of 215 (14%) patients tested had an abnormal CMA. Twenty-nine had
CNVs (13%) and one (0.5%) a clinically significant stretch of homozygosity.
Twenty (9.3%) had a CMA finding considered to be pathogenic or involved in
susceptibility to the condition of interest, and 10 (4.7%) had findings of
unknown significance. Their phenotypes included infantile spasms and other
epilepsies, neuromuscular conditions, ataxia, movement disorders, microcephaly
and malformations of cortical development. At least one third of patients did not
meet national funding criteria for CMA at the time of presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: CMA detected clinically significant abnormalities in a broad range
of neurologic phenotypes of unknown aetiology. This test should be considered a
first-tier investigation of children with neurologic disorders in whom the
initial clinical assessment does not indicate a likely aetiology, especially
those with severe epilepsies and neurologically abnormal neonates.

(c) 2013 The Authors. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health (c) 2013 Paediatrics
and Child Health Division (Royal Australasian College of Physicians).

PMID: 23731025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Aug;56(8):420-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.05.006. Epub 2013
May 29.

Genotype-phenotype analysis of 18q12.1-q12.2 copy number variation in autism.

Wang P(1), Carrion P, Qiao Y, Tyson C, Hrynchak M, Calli K, Lopez-Rangel E,
Andrieux J, Delobel B, Duban-Bedu B, Thuresson AC, Anneren G, Liu X,
Rajcan-Separovic E, Suzanne Lewis ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are complex neurodevelopmental conditions
characterized by delays in social interactions and communication as well as
displays of restrictive/repetitive interests. DNA copy number variants have been 
identified as a genomic susceptibility factor in ASDs and imply significant
genetic heterogeneity. We report a 7-year-old female with ADOS-G and ADI-R
confirmed autistic disorder harbouring a de novo 4 Mb duplication (18q12.1). Our 
subject displays severely deficient expressive language, stereotypic and
repetitive behaviours, mild intellectual disability (ID), focal epilepsy, short
stature and absence of significant dysmorphic features. Search of the PubMed
literature and DECIPHER database identified 4 additional cases involving 18q12.1 
associated with autism and/or ID that overlap our case: one duplication, two
deletions and one balanced translocation. Notably, autism and ID are seen with
genomic gain or loss at 18q12.1, plus epilepsy and short stature in duplication
cases, and hypotonia and tall stature in deletion cases. No consistent dysmorphic
features were noted amongst the reviewed cases. We review prospective ASD/ID
candidate genes integral to 18q12.1, including those coding for the
desmocollin/desmoglein cluster, ring finger proteins 125 and 138, trafficking
protein particle complex 8 and dystrobrevin-alpha. The collective clinical and
molecular features common to microduplication 18q12.1 suggest that
dosage-sensitive, position or contiguous gene effects may be associated in the
etiopathogenesis of this autism-ID-epilepsy syndrome.

Copyright (c) 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Transl Psychiatry. 2013 May 28;3:e262. doi: 10.1038/tp.2013.38.

Haplotype structure enables prioritization of common markers and candidate genes 
in autism spectrum disorder.

Vardarajan BN(1), Eran A, Jung JY, Kunkel LM, Wall DP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition that results in 
behavioral, social and communication impairments. ASD has a substantial genetic
component, with 88-95% trait concordance among monozygotic twins. Efforts to
elucidate the causes of ASD have uncovered hundreds of susceptibility loci and
candidate genes. However, owing to its polygenic nature and clinical
heterogeneity, only a few of these markers represent clear targets for further
analyses. In the present study, we used the linkage structure associated with
published genetic markers of ASD to simultaneously improve candidate gene
detection while providing a means of prioritizing markers of common genetic
variation in ASD. We first mined the literature for linkage and association
studies of single-nucleotide polymorphisms, copy-number variations and
multi-allelic markers in Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE) families. From
markers that reached genome-wide significance, we calculated male-specific
genetic distances, in light of the observed strong male bias in ASD. Four of 67
autism-implicated regions, 3p26.1, 3p26.3, 3q25-27 and 5p15, were enriched with
differentially expressed genes in blood and brain from individuals with ASD. Of
30 genes differentially expressed across multiple expression data sets, 21 were
within 10 cM of an autism-implicated locus. Among them, CNTN4, CADPS2, SUMF1,
SLC9A9, NTRK3 have been previously implicated in autism, whereas others have been
implicated in neurological disorders comorbid with ASD. This work leverages the
rich multimodal genomic information collected on AGRE families to present an
efficient integrative strategy for prioritizing autism candidates and improving
our understanding of the relationships among the vast collection of past genetic 
studies.

PMCID: PMC3669925
PMID: 23715297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Sep 15;22(18):3749-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt226. Epub 2013 May
24.

The functional genetic link of NLGN4X knockdown and neurodevelopment in neural
stem cells.

Shi L(1), Chang X, Zhang P, Coba MP, Lu W, Wang K.

Author information: 
(1)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

Genetic mutations in NLGN4X (neuroligin 4), including point mutations and copy
number variants (CNVs), have been associated with susceptibility to autism
spectrum disorders (ASDs). However, it is unclear how mutations in NLGN4X result 
in neurodevelopmental defects. Here, we used neural stem cells (NSCs) as in vitro
models to explore the impacts of NLGN4X knockdown on neurodevelopment. Using two 
shRNAmir-based vectors targeting NLGN4X and one control shRNAmir vector, we
modulated NLGN4X expression and differentiated these NSCs into mature neurons. We
monitored the neurodevelopmental process at Weeks 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 6, based on
morphological analysis and whole-genome gene expression profiling. At the
cellular level, in NSCs with NLGN4X knockdown, we observed increasingly delayed
neuronal development and compromised neurite formation, starting from Week 2
through Week 6 post differentiation. At the molecular level, we identified
multiple pathways, such as neurogenesis, neuron differentiation and muscle
development, which are increasingly disturbed in cells with NLGN4X knockdown.
Notably, several postsynaptic genes, including DLG4, NLGN1 and NLGN3, also have
decreased expression. Based on in vitro models, NLGN4X knockdown directly impacts
neurodevelopmental process during the formation of neurons and their connections.
Our functional genomics study highlights the utility of NSCs models in
understanding the functional roles of CNVs in affecting neurodevelopment and
conferring susceptibility to neurodevelopmental diseases.

PMCID: PMC3749863
PMID: 23710042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;22(1):105-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.99. Epub 2013 May
22.

Neurodevelopmental disorders among individuals with duplication of 4p13 to 4p12
containing a GABAA receptor subunit gene cluster.

Polan MB(1), Pastore MT(2), Steingass K(3), Hashimoto S(4), Thrush DL(5), Pyatt
R(5), Reshmi S(5), Gastier-Foster JM(6), Astbury C(5), McBride KL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Human Genetics, The Research Institute, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (2)1] Division of Molecular and Human
Genetics, The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH,
USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)1] Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] 
Division of Behavioral Pediatrics, The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (5)1] 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Research Institute,
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of Pathology,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (6)1] Department of Pediatrics, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, OH, USA [3] Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA. (7)1] Division of Molecular and Human Genetics, The Research
Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of
Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [3] Center for
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, The Research Institute, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Recent studies have shown that certain copy number variations (CNV) are
associated with a wide range of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism
spectrum disorders (ASD), bipolar disorder and intellectual disabilities.
Implicated regions and genes have comprised a variety of post synaptic complex
proteins and neurotransmitter receptors, including gamma-amino butyric acid A
(GABAA). Clusters of GABAA receptor subunit genes are found on chromosomes 4p12, 
5q34, 6q15 and 15q11-13. Maternally inherited 15q11-13 duplications among
individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders are well described, but few case
reports exist for the other regions. We describe a family with a 2.42 Mb
duplication at chromosome 4p13 to 4p12, identified in the index case and other
family members by oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization, that
contains 13 genes including a cluster of four GABAA receptor subunit genes.
Fluorescent in-situ hybridization was used to confirm the duplication. The
duplication segregates with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders in this
family, including ASD (index case), developmental delay, dyspraxia and ADHD
(brother), global developmental delays (brother), learning disabilities (mother) 
and bipolar disorder (maternal grandmother). In addition, we identified and
describe another individual unrelated to this family, with a similar duplication,
who was diagnosed with ASD, ADHD and borderline intellectual disability. The 4p13
to 4p12 duplication appears to confer a susceptibility to a variety of
neurodevelopmental disorders in these two families. We hypothesize that the
duplication acts through a dosage effect of GABAA receptor subunit genes, adding 
evidence for alterations in the GABAergic system in the etiology of
neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC3865421
PMID: 23695283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;22(1):40-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.93. Epub 2013 May
22.

Rare copy number variation in cerebral palsy.

McMichael G(1), Girirajan S(2), Moreno-De-Luca A(3), Gecz J(4), Shard C(5),
Nguyen LS(5), Nicholl J(6), Gibson C(1), Haan E(7), Eichler E(2), Martin CL(8),
MacLennan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Robinson Institute, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. (2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. (3)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute,
Genomic Medicine Institute, and Department of Pediatrics, Geisinger Health
System, Danville, PA, USA. (4)1] Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology
at Women's and Children's Hospital, Adelaide, Australia [2] Department of
Paediatrics at the Women's and Children's Hospital, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (5)Department of Paediatrics at the Women's
and Children's Hospital, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. (6)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology at Women's and
Children's Hospital, Adelaide, Australia. (7)South Australian Clinical Genetics
Service, SA Pathology at Women's and Children's Hospital, and Discipline of
Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, USA.

Recent studies have established the role of rare copy number variants (CNVs) in
several neurological disorders but the contribution of rare CNVs to cerebral
palsy (CP) is not known. Fifty Caucasian families having children with CP were
studied using two microarray designs. Potentially pathogenic, rare (<1%
population frequency) CNVs were identified, and their frequency determined, by
comparing the CNVs found in cases with 8329 adult controls with no known
neurological disorders. Ten of the 50 cases (20%) had rare CNVs of potential
relevance to CP; there were a total of 14 CNVs, which were observed in <0.1%
(<8/8329) of the control population. Eight inherited from an unaffected mother: a
751-kb deletion including FSCB, a 1.5-Mb duplication of 7q21.13, a 534-kb
duplication of 15q11.2, a 446-kb duplication including CTNND2, a 219-kb
duplication including MCPH1, a 169-kb duplication of 22q13.33, a 64-kb
duplication of MC2R, and a 135-bp exonic deletion of SLC06A1. Three inherited
from an unaffected father: a 386-kb deletion of 12p12.2-p12.1, a 234-kb
duplication of 10q26.13, and a 4-kb exonic deletion of COPS3. The inheritance was
unknown for three CNVs: a 157-bp exonic deletion of ACOX1, a 693-kb duplication
of 17q25.3, and a 265-kb duplication of DAAM1. This is the first systematic study
of CNVs in CP, and although it did not identify de novo mutations, has shown
inherited, rare CNVs involving potentially pathogenic genes and pathways
requiring further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3865415
PMID: 23695280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 May;19(5):568-72. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.59. Epub 2013 May 21.

High rate of disease-related copy number variations in childhood onset
schizophrenia.

Ahn K(1), Gotay N(1), Andersen TM(1), Anvari AA(1), Gochman P(1), Lee Y(1),
Sanders S(2), Guha S(3), Darvasi A(4), Glessner JT(5), Hakonarson H(5), Lencz
T(3), State MW(2), Shugart YY(6), Rapoport JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Childhood Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Program on Neurogenetics, Child Study
Center, Department of Psychiatry, Department of Genetics, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (3)The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Psychiatry
Research, Glen Oaks, NY, USA. (4)Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (6)Unit of Statistical Genomics, National Institute of
Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are risk factors in neurodevelopmental disorders,
including autism, epilepsy, intellectual disability (ID) and schizophrenia.
Childhood onset schizophrenia (COS), defined as onset before the age of 13 years,
is a rare and severe form of the disorder, with more striking array of
prepsychotic developmental disorders and abnormalities in brain development.
Because of the well-known phenotypic variability associated with pathogenic CNVs,
we conducted whole genome genotyping to detect CNVs and then focused on a group
of 46 rare CNVs that had well-documented risk for adult onset schizophrenia
(AOS), autism, epilepsy and/or ID. We evaluated 126 COS probands, 69 of which
also had a healthy full sibling. When COS probands were compared with their
matched related controls, significantly more affected individuals carried
disease-related CNVs (P=0.017). Moreover, COS probands showed a higher rate than 
that found in AOS probands (P<0.0001). A total of 15 (11.9%) subjects exhibited
at least one such CNV and four of these subjects (26.7%) had two. Five of 15
(4.0% of the sample) had a 2.5-3 Mb deletion mapping to 22q11.2, a rate higher
than that reported for adult onset (0.3-1%) (P<0.001) or autism spectrum disorder
and, indeed, the highest rate reported for any clinical population to date. For
one COS subject, a duplication found at 22q13.3 had previously only been
associated with autism, and for four patients CNVs at 8q11.2, 10q22.3, 16p11.2
and 17q21.3 had only previously been associated with ID. Taken together, these
findings support the well-known pleiotropic effects of these CNVs suggesting
shared abnormalities early in brain development. Clinically, broad CNV-based
population screening is needed to assess their overall clinical burden.

PMID: 23689535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1722-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35946. Epub 2013
May 17.

Deletions of 16p11.2 and 19p13.2 in a family with intellectual disability and
generalized epilepsy.

Bassuk AG(1), Geraghty E, Wu S, Mullen SA, Berkovic SF, Scheffer IE, Mefford HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Rare copy number variants (CNVs) have been established as an important cause of
various neurodevelopmental disorders, including intellectual disability (ID) and 
epilepsy. In some cases, a second CNV may contribute to a more severe clinical
presentation. Here we present two siblings and their mother who have mild ID,
short stature, obesity and seizures. Array CGH studies show that each affected
individual has two large, rare CNVs. The first is a deletion of chromosome
16p11.2, which has been previously associated with ID and autism. The second is a
0.9 Mb deletion of 19p13.2, which results in the deletion of a cluster of zinc
finger genes. We suggest that, while the 16p11.2 deletion is likely the primary
cause of the obesity and ID in this family, the 19p13.2 deletion may act as a
modifier of the epilepsy phenotype, which is not a core feature of the 16p11.2
deletion syndrome. We investigate the potential role of ZNF44, a gene within the 
deleted region, in a cohort of patients with generalized epilepsy.

Copyright (c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4169108
PMID: 23686817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genome Res. 2013 Sep;23(9):1395-409. doi: 10.1101/gr.152454.112. Epub 2013 May 8.

NAHR-mediated copy-number variants in a clinical population: mechanistic insights
into both genomic disorders and Mendelizing traits.

Dittwald P(1), Gambin T, Szafranski P, Li J, Amato S, Divon MY, Rodriguez Rojas
LX, Elton LE, Scott DA, Schaaf CP, Torres-Martinez W, Stevens AK, Rosenfeld JA,
Agadi S, Francis D, Kang SH, Breman A, Lalani SR, Bacino CA, Bi W, Milosavljevic 
A, Beaudet AL, Patel A, Shaw CA, Lupski JR, Gambin A, Cheung SW, Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We delineated and analyzed directly oriented paralogous low-copy repeats
(DP-LCRs) in the most recent version of the human haploid reference genome. The
computationally defined DP-LCRs were cross-referenced with our chromosomal
microarray analysis (CMA) database of 25,144 patients subjected to genome-wide
assays. This computationally guided approach to the empirically derived large
data set allowed us to investigate genomic rearrangement relative frequencies and
identify new loci for recurrent nonallelic homologous recombination
(NAHR)-mediated copy-number variants (CNVs). The most commonly observed recurrent
CNVs were NPHP1 duplications (233), CHRNA7 duplications (175), and 22q11.21
deletions (DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome, 166). In the [?]25% of CMA cases for
which parental studies were available, we identified 190 de novo recurrent CNVs. 
In this group, the most frequently observed events were deletions of 22q11.21
(48), 16p11.2 (autism, 34), and 7q11.23 (Williams-Beuren syndrome, 11). Several
features of DP-LCRs, including length, distance between NAHR substrate elements, 
DNA sequence identity (fraction matching), GC content, and concentration of the
homologous recombination (HR) hot spot motif 5'-CCNCCNTNNCCNC-3', correlate with 
the frequencies of the recurrent CNVs events. Four novel adjacent DP-LCR-flanked 
and NAHR-prone regions, involving 2q12.2q13, were elucidated in association with 
novel genomic disorders. Our study quantitates genome architectural features
responsible for NAHR-mediated genomic instability and further elucidates the role
of NAHR in human disease.

PMCID: PMC3759717
PMID: 23657883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Jul;13(6):887-99.

An EJC factor RBM8a regulates anxiety behaviors.

Alachkar A(1), Jiang D, Harrison M, Zhou Y, Chen G, Mao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Neuroplasticity depends on the precise timing of gene expression, which requires 
accurate control of mRNA stability and rapid elimination of abnormal mRNA.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is an RNA surveillance mechanism that ensures 
the speedy degradation of mRNAs carrying premature termination codons (PTCs).
This mechanism relies on several key Exon Junction Complex (EJC) factors to
distinguish PTCs from normal stop codons. NMD degrades not only aberrant
transcripts carrying PTCs, but also normal transcripts harboring a normal stop
codon [1]. Intriguingly, mutations in an NMD factor, Upf3b, have been found in
patients with autism [2, 3]. A binding partner of Upf3b, RBM8a, is located in the
1q21.1 copy-number variation (CNV) associated with mental retardation, autism
[4], schizophrenia [5], and microcephaly [6]. However, the functions of EJC
factors and their roles in behavioral regulation are still elusive. RBM8a protein
is a core component of the EJC that plays an important role in NMD. Recent
genetic study indicated that RBM8a gain-of-function significantly associated with
intellectual disability [7]. In this study we investigated the effect of RBM8a
overexpression on affective behaviors in mice. Lentivirus expressing RBM8a was
infused into the hippocampus of adult mice to conduct behavioral studies
including social interaction, open field, elevated plus maze, and forced swimming
tests. Our results showed that overexpression of RBM8a in the mouse dentate gyrus
(DG) leads to increased anxiety-like behavior, abnormal social interaction and
decreased immobile time in forced swimming test (FST). To examine the underlying 
mechanism, we found that overexpressing RBM8a in cultured primary neurons lead to
significant higher frequency of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents
(mEPSCs). To explore the underlying mechanism of RBM8a mediated behavioral
changes, RNA-immunoprecipitation (RNA-IP) detected that RBM8a binds to CaMK2,
GluR1 and Egr1 mRNA, suggesting that RBM8a may target neuronal genes to regulate 
behaviors. This is the first study that demonstrates the key role of RBM8a on the
emotional behaviors in mice. These results reveal new neural mechanisms by which 
NMD modulates behaviors and potentially provide a better understanding of
pathophysiology underlying psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 23638902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 18;8(4):e61365. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061365. Print 2013.

Male-biased autosomal effect of 16p13.11 copy number variation in
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Tropeano M(1), Ahn JW, Dobson RJ, Breen G, Rucker J, Dixit A, Pal DK, McGuffin P,
Farmer A, White PS, Andrieux J, Vassos E, Ogilvie CM, Curran S, Collier DA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK. maria.tropeano@kcl.ac.uk

Copy number variants (CNVs) at chromosome 16p13.11 have been associated with a
range of neurodevelopmental disorders including autism, ADHD, intellectual
disability and schizophrenia. Significant sex differences in prevalence, course
and severity have been described for a number of these conditions but the
biological and environmental factors underlying such sex-specific features remain
unclear. We tested the burden and the possible sex-biased effect of CNVs at
16p13.11 in a sample of 10,397 individuals with a range of neurodevelopmental
conditions, clinically referred for array comparative genomic hybridisation
(aCGH); cases were compared with 11,277 controls. In order to identify candidate 
phenotype-associated genes, we performed an interval-based analysis and
investigated the presence of ohnologs at 16p13.11; finally, we searched the
DECIPHER database for previously identified 16p13.11 copy number variants. In the
clinical referral series, we identified 46 cases with CNVs of variable size at
16p13.11, including 28 duplications and 18 deletions. Patients were referred for 
various phenotypes, including developmental delay, autism, speech delay, learning
difficulties, behavioural problems, epilepsy, microcephaly and physical
dysmorphisms. CNVs at 16p13.11 were also present in 17 controls. Association
analysis revealed an excess of CNVs in cases compared with controls (OR = 2.59;
p = 0.0005), and a sex-biased effect, with a significant enrichment of CNVs only 
in the male subgroup of cases (OR = 5.62; p = 0.0002), but not in females
(OR = 1.19, p = 0.673). The same pattern of results was also observed in the
DECIPHER sample. Interval-based analysis showed a significant enrichment of case 
CNVs containing interval II (OR = 2.59; p = 0.0005), located in the 0.83 Mb
genomic region between 15.49-16.32 Mb, and encompassing the four ohnologs NDE1,
MYH11, ABCC1 and ABCC6. Our data confirm that duplications and deletions at
16p13.11 represent incompletely penetrant pathogenic mutations that predispose to
a range of neurodevelopmental disorders, and suggest a sex-limited effect on the 
penetrance of the pathological phenotypes at the 16p13.11 locus.

PMCID: PMC3630198
PMID: 23637818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;22(1):71-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.88. Epub 2013 May 1.

Prospective diagnostic analysis of copy number variants using SNP microarrays in 
individuals with autism spectrum disorders.

Nava C(1), Keren B(2), Mignot C(3), Rastetter A(4), Chantot-Bastaraud S(5),
Faudet A(6), Fonteneau E(2), Amiet C(7), Laurent C(8), Jacquette A(9), Whalen
S(6), Afenjar A(10), Perisse D(11), Doummar D(12), Dorison N(13), Leboyer M(14), 
Siffroi JP(5), Cohen D(15), Brice A(16), Heron D(3), Depienne C(16).

Author information: 
(1)1] INSERM, U975 (CRICM), Institut du cerveau et de la moelle epiniere (ICM),
Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France [2] CNRS 7225 (CRICM), Hopital
Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France [3] Universite Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris-6
(UPMC), UMR_S 975, Paris, France [4] AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere,
Departement de Genetique et de Cytogenetique, Unite fonctionnelle de genetique
clinique, Paris, France. (2)AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Departement de
Genetique et de Cytogenetique, Unite fonctionnelle de cytogenetique, Paris,
France. (3)1] AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Departement de Genetique et de
Cytogenetique, Unite fonctionnelle de genetique clinique, Paris, France [2]
AP-HP, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Service de Neuropediatrie, Paris, France [3]
Centre de Reference 'deficiences intellectuelles de causes rares', Paris, France 
[4] Groupe de Recherche Clinique (GRC) 'deficience intellectuelle et autisme'
UPMC, Paris, France. (4)1] INSERM, U975 (CRICM), Institut du cerveau et de la
moelle epiniere (ICM), Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France [2] CNRS 7225
(CRICM), Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France [3] Universite Pierre et Marie 
Curie-Paris-6 (UPMC), UMR_S 975, Paris, France. (5)AP-HP, Hopital Armand
Trousseau, Service de Genetique et Embryologie Medicales, Paris, France.
(6)AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Departement de Genetique et de
Cytogenetique, Unite fonctionnelle de genetique clinique, Paris, France.
(7)AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Service de Psychiatrie de l'enfant et de
l'adolescent, Paris, France. (8)1] INSERM, U975 (CRICM), Institut du cerveau et
de la moelle epiniere (ICM), Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France [2] CNRS
7225 (CRICM), Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France [3] AP-HP, Hopital
Pitie-Salpetriere, Service de Psychiatrie de l'enfant et de l'adolescent, Paris, 
France. (9)1] AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Departement de Genetique et de
Cytogenetique, Unite fonctionnelle de genetique clinique, Paris, France [2]
Centre de Reference 'deficiences intellectuelles de causes rares', Paris, France 
[3] Groupe de Recherche Clinique (GRC) 'deficience intellectuelle et autisme'
UPMC, Paris, France. (10)1] AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Departement de
Genetique et de Cytogenetique, Unite fonctionnelle de genetique clinique, Paris, 
France [2] AP-HP, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Service de Neuropediatrie, Paris,
France [3] Centre de Reference 'deficiences intellectuelles de causes rares',
Paris, France [4] Groupe de Recherche Clinique (GRC) 'deficience intellectuelle
et autisme' UPMC, Paris, France [5] Centre de Reference des anomalies du
developpement et syndromes malformatifs, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.
(11)1] AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Service de Psychiatrie de l'enfant et de
l'adolescent, Paris, France [2] Centre Diagnostic Autisme, Pitie-Salpetriere
Hopital, Paris, France. (12)AP-HP, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Service de
Neuropediatrie, Paris, France. (13)1] AP-HP, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Service de
Neuropediatrie, Paris, France [2] Centre de Reference des anomalies du
developpement et syndromes malformatifs, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.
(14)1] INSERM, U955, Creteil, France [2] Universite Paris Est, Faculte de
medecine, Creteil, France [3] AP-HP, Hopital H Mondor - A. Chenevier, Pole de
Psychiatrie, Creteil, France [4] Fondation FondaMental, Creteil, France. (15)1]
AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Service de Psychiatrie de l'enfant et de
l'adolescent, Paris, France [2] Institut des Systemes Intelligents et Robotiques,
CNRS UMR 7222, UPMC-Paris-6, Paris, France. (16)1] INSERM, U975 (CRICM), Institut
du cerveau et de la moelle epiniere (ICM), Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris,
France [2] CNRS 7225 (CRICM), Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France [3]
Universite Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris-6 (UPMC), UMR_S 975, Paris, France [4]
AP-HP, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, Departement de Genetique et de Cytogenetique,
Unite fonctionnelle de genetique clinique, Paris, France [5] AP-HP, Hopital
Pitie-Salpetriere, Departement de Genetique et de Cytogenetique, Unite
fonctionnelle de neurogenetique moleculaire et cellulaire, Paris, France.

Copy number variants (CNVs) have repeatedly been found to cause or predispose to 
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). For diagnostic purposes, we screened 194
individuals with ASDs for CNVs using Illumina SNP arrays. In several probands, we
also analyzed candidate genes located in inherited deletions to unmask autosomal 
recessive variants. Three CNVs, a de novo triplication of chromosome 15q11-q12 of
paternal origin, a deletion on chromosome 9p24 and a de novo 3q29 deletion, were 
identified as the cause of the disorder in one individual each. An autosomal
recessive cause was considered possible in two patients: a homozygous 1p31.1
deletion encompassing PTGER3 and a deletion of the entire DOCK10 gene associated 
with a rare hemizygous missense variant. We also identified multiple private or
recurrent CNVs, the majority of which were inherited from asymptomatic parents.
Although highly penetrant CNVs or variants inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner were detected in rare cases, our results mainly support the hypothesis
that most CNVs contribute to ASDs in association with other CNVs or point
variants located elsewhere in the genome. Identification of these genetic
interactions in individuals with ASDs constitutes a formidable challenge.

PMCID: PMC3865413
PMID: 23632794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;22(1):57-63. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.67. Epub 2013 May
1.

Reciprocal deletion and duplication at 2q23.1 indicates a role for MBD5 in autism
spectrum disorder.

Mullegama SV(1), Rosenfeld JA(2), Orellana C(3), van Bon BW(4), Halbach S(5),
Repnikova EA(6), Brick L(7), Li C(7), Dupuis L(8), Rosello M(3), Aradhya S(9),
Stavropoulos DJ(10), Manickam K(11), Mitchell E(12), Hodge JC(12), Talkowski
ME(13), Gusella JF(14), Keller K(15), Zonana J(15), Schwartz S(16), Pyatt RE(6), 
Waggoner DJ(5), Shaffer LG(17), Lin AE(18), de Vries BB(4), Mendoza-Londono R(8),
Elsea SH(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA. (2)Signature Genomic Laboratories,
PerkinElmer Inc., Spokane, WA, USA. (3)Service of Genetics and Prenatal
Diagnosis, University and Polytechnic Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Human Genetics, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. (6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
Clinical Genetics Program, McMaster University Medical Center and McMaster
Children's Hospital, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. (8)Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children and
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (9)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD,
USA. (10)1] Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine,
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [2] Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. 
(12)1] Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN, USA [2] Department of Medical Genetics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(13)1] Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA [2] Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of
Harvard and M.I.T., Cambridge, MA, USA [3] Departments of Genetics and Neurology,
Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, USA. (14)1] Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and M.I.T., Cambridge, MA, USA
[2] Departments of Genetics and Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA,
USA [3] Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. (15)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Child
Development and Rehabilitation Center, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, OR, USA. (16)Laboratory Corporation of America, Research Triangle Park,
Durham, NC, USA. (17)Paw Print Genetics, Genetic Veterinary Sciences, Inc.,
Spokane, WA, USA. (18)1] Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA [2] Medical Genetics, Massachusetts General Hospital
for Children, Boston, MA, USA. (19)1] Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA [2]
Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine,
Richmond, VA, USA [3] Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Copy number variations associated with abnormal gene dosage have an important
role in the genetic etiology of many neurodevelopmental disorders, including
intellectual disability (ID) and autism. We hypothesize that the chromosome
2q23.1 region encompassing MBD5 is a dosage-dependent region, wherein deletion or
duplication results in altered gene dosage. We previously established the 2q23.1 
microdeletion syndrome and report herein 23 individuals with 2q23.1 duplications,
thus establishing a complementary duplication syndrome. The observed phenotype
includes ID, language impairments, infantile hypotonia and gross motor delay,
behavioral problems, autistic features, dysmorphic facial features (pinnae
anomalies, arched eyebrows, prominent nose, small chin, thin upper lip), and
minor digital anomalies (fifth finger clinodactyly and large broad first toe).
The microduplication size varies among all cases and ranges from 68 kb to 53.7
Mb, encompassing a region that includes MBD5, an important factor in methylation 
patterning and epigenetic regulation. We previously reported that
haploinsufficiency of MBD5 is the primary causal factor in 2q23.1 microdeletion
syndrome and that mutations in MBD5 are associated with autism. In this study, we
demonstrate that MBD5 is the only gene in common among all duplication cases and 
that overexpression of MBD5 is likely responsible for the core clinical features 
present in 2q23.1 microduplication syndrome. Phenotypic analyses suggest that
2q23.1 duplication results in a slightly less severe phenotype than the
reciprocal deletion. The features associated with a deletion, mutation or
duplication of MBD5 and the gene expression changes observed support MBD5 as a
dosage-sensitive gene critical for normal development.

PMCID: PMC3865402
PMID: 23632792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Neurogenetics. 2013 May;14(2):143-52. doi: 10.1007/s10048-013-0363-z. Epub 2013
Apr 28.

Peripheral blood gene expression signature differentiates children with autism
from unaffected siblings.

Kong SW(1), Shimizu-Motohashi Y, Campbell MG, Lee IH, Collins CD, Brewster SJ,
Holm IA, Rappaport L, Kohane IS, Kunkel LM.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology Division of Health Sciences and 
Technology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is one of the most prevalent neurodevelopmental
disorders with high heritability, yet a majority of genetic contribution to
pathophysiology is not known. Siblings of individuals with ASD are at increased
risk for ASD and autistic traits, but the genetic contribution for simplex
families is estimated to be less when compared to multiplex families. To explore 
the genomic (dis-) similarity between proband and unaffected sibling in simplex
families, we used genome-wide gene expression profiles of blood from 20
proband-unaffected sibling pairs and 18 unrelated control individuals. The global
gene expression profiles of unaffected siblings were more similar to those from
probands as they shared genetic and environmental background. A total of 189
genes were significantly differentially expressed between proband-sib pairs
(nominal p < 0.01) after controlling for age, sex, and family effects. Probands
and siblings were distinguished into two groups by cluster analysis with these
genes. Overall, unaffected siblings were equally distant from the centroid of
probands and from that of unrelated controls with the differentially expressed
genes. Interestingly, five of 20 siblings had gene expression profiles that were 
more similar to unrelated controls than to their matched probands. In summary, we
found a set of genes that distinguished probands from the unaffected siblings,
and a subgroup of unaffected siblings who were more similar to probands. The
pathways that characterized probands compared to siblings using peripheral blood 
gene expression profiles were the up-regulation of ribosomal, spliceosomal, and
mitochondrial pathways, and the down-regulation of neuroreceptor-ligand, immune
response and calcium signaling pathways. Further integrative study with
structural genetic variations such as de novo mutations, rare variants, and copy 
number variations would clarify whether these transcriptomic changes are
structural or environmental in origin.

PMCID: PMC3686296
PMID: 23625158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013 Apr;52(4):414-430.e14. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2013.01.003.

Distribution of disease-associated copy number variants across distinct disorders
of cognitive development.

Pescosolido MF(1), Gamsiz ED, Nagpal S, Morrow EM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Brain Science at Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the present study was to discover the extent to which
distinct DSM disorders share large, highly recurrent copy number variants (CNVs) 
as susceptibility factors. We also sought to identify gene mechanisms common to
groups of diagnoses and/or specific to a given diagnosis based on associations
with CNVs.
METHOD: Systematic review of 820 PubMed articles on autism spectrum disorder
(ASD), intellectual disability (ID), schizophrenia, and epilepsy produced 54 CNVs
associated with one or several disorders. Pathway analysis on genes implicated by
CNVs in different groupings was conducted.
RESULTS: The majority of CNVs were found in ID with the other disorders somewhat 
subsumed, yet certain CNVs were associated with isolated or groups of disorders. 
Based on genes implicated by CNVs, ID encompassed 96.8% of genes in ASD, 92.8% of
genes in schizophrenia, and 100.0% of genes in epilepsy. Pathway analysis
revealed that synapse processes were enriched in ASD, ID, and schizophrenia.
Disease-specific processes were identified in ID (actin cytoskeleton processes), 
schizophrenia (ubiquitin-related processes), and ASD (synaptic vesicle transport 
and exocytosis).
CONCLUSIONS: Intellectual disability may arise from the broadest range of genetic
pathways, and specific subsets of these pathways appear to be relevant to other
disorders or combinations of these disorders. It is clear that statistically
significant CNVs across disorders of cognitive development are highly enriched
for biological processes related to the synapse. There are also disorder-specific
processes that may aid in understanding the distinct presentations and
pathophysiology of these disorders.

Copyright (c) 2013 American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3774163
PMID: 23582872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jul 15;22(14):2960-72. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt150. Epub 2013 Apr
10.

An eQTL mapping approach reveals that rare variants in the SEMA5A regulatory
network impact autism risk.

Cheng Y(1), Quinn JF, Weiss LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

To date, genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number variant
(CNV) association studies of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have led to
promising signals but not to easily interpretable or translatable results. Our
own genome-wide association study (GWAS) showed significant association to an
intergenic SNP near Semaphorin 5A (SEMA5A) and provided evidence for reduced
expression of the same gene. In a novel GWAS follow-up approach, we map an
expression regulatory pathway for a GWAS candidate gene, SEMA5A, in silico by
using population expression and genotype data sets. We find that the SEMA5A
regulatory network significantly overlaps rare autism-specific CNVs. The SEMA5A
regulatory network includes previous autism candidate genes and regions,
including MACROD2, A2BP1, MCPH1, MAST4, CDH8, CADM1, FOXP1, AUTS2, MBD5, 7q21,
20p, USH2A, KIRREL3, DBF4B and RELN, among others. Our results provide: (i) a
novel data-derived network implicated in autism, (ii) evidence that the same
pathway seeded by an initial SNP association shows association with rare genetic 
variation in ASDs, (iii) a potential mechanism of action and interpretation for
the previous autism candidate genes and genetic variants that fall in this
network, and (iv) a novel approach that can be applied to other candidate genes
for complex genetic disorders. We take a step towards better understanding of the
significance of SEMA5A pathways in autism that can guide interpretation of many
other genetic results in ASDs.

PMCID: PMC3690972
PMID: 23575222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS Genet. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003349. Epub 2013 
Mar 21.

Human spermatogenic failure purges deleterious mutation load from the autosomes
and both sex chromosomes, including the gene DMRT1.

Lopes AM(1), Aston KI, Thompson E, Carvalho F, Goncalves J, Huang N, Matthiesen
R, Noordam MJ, Quintela I, Ramu A, Seabra C, Wilfert AB, Dai J, Downie JM,
Fernandes S, Guo X, Sha J, Amorim A, Barros A, Carracedo A, Hu Z, Hurles ME,
Moskovtsev S, Ober C, Paduch DA, Schiffman JD, Schlegel PN, Sousa M, Carrell DT, 
Conrad DF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal.

Gonadal failure, along with early pregnancy loss and perinatal death, may be an
important filter that limits the propagation of harmful mutations in the human
population. We hypothesized that men with spermatogenic impairment, a disease
with unknown genetic architecture and a common cause of male infertility, are
enriched for rare deleterious mutations compared to men with normal
spermatogenesis. After assaying genomewide SNPs and CNVs in 323 Caucasian men
with idiopathic spermatogenic impairment and more than 1,100 controls, we
estimate that each rare autosomal deletion detected in our study multiplicatively
changes a man's risk of disease by 10% (OR 1.10 [1.04-1.16], p<2 x 10(-3)), rare 
X-linked CNVs by 29%, (OR 1.29 [1.11-1.50], p<1 x 10(-3)), and rare Y-linked
duplications by 88% (OR 1.88 [1.13-3.13], p<0.03). By contrasting the properties 
of our case-specific CNVs with those of CNV callsets from cases of autism,
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and intellectual disability, we propose that the
CNV burden in spermatogenic impairment is distinct from the burden of large,
dominant mutations described for neurodevelopmental disorders. We identified two 
patients with deletions of DMRT1, a gene on chromosome 9p24.3 orthologous to the 
putative sex determination locus of the avian ZW chromosome system. In an
independent sample of Han Chinese men, we identified 3 more DMRT1 deletions in
979 cases of idiopathic azoospermia and none in 1,734 controls, and found none in
an additional 4,519 controls from public databases. The combined results indicate
that DMRT1 loss-of-function mutations are a risk factor and potential genetic
cause of human spermatogenic failure (frequency of 0.38% in 1306 cases and 0% in 
7,754 controls, p = 6.2 x 10(-5)). Our study identifies other recurrent CNVs as
potential causes of idiopathic azoospermia and generates hypotheses for directing
future studies on the genetic basis of male infertility and IVF outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3605256
PMID: 23555275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059685. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Functional impacts of NRXN1 knockdown on neurodevelopment in stem cell models.

Zeng L(1), Zhang P, Shi L, Yamamoto V, Lu W, Wang K.

Author information: 
(1)Zilhka Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Exonic deletions in NRXN1 have been associated with several neurodevelopmental
disorders, including autism, schizophrenia and developmental delay. However, the 
molecular mechanism by which NRXN1 deletions impact neurodevelopment remains
unclear. Here we used human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) and human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) as models to investigate the functional impacts of
NRXN1 knockdown. We first generated hiPSCs from skin fibroblasts and
differentiated them into neural stem cells (NSCs). We reduced NRXN1 expression in
NSCs via a controlled shRNAmir-based knockdown system during differentiation, and
monitored the transcriptome alteration by RNA-Seq and quantitative PCR at several
time points. Interestingly, half reduction of NRXN1 expression resulted in
changes of expression levels for the cell adhesion pathway (20 genes,
P = 2.8x10(-6)) and neuron differentiation pathway (13 genes, P = 2.1x10(-4)),
implicating that single-gene perturbation can impact biological networks
important for neurodevelopment. Furthermore, astrocyte marker GFAP was
significantly reduced in a time dependent manner that correlated with NRXN1
reduction. This observation was reproduced in both hiPSCs and hESCs. In summary, 
based on in vitro models, NRXN1 deletions impact several biological processes
during neurodevelopment, including synaptic adhesion and neuron differentiation. 
Our study highlights the utility of stem cell models in understanding the
functional roles of copy number variations (CNVs) in conferring susceptibility to
neurodevelopmental diseases.

PMCID: PMC3607566
PMID: 23536886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jul 15;22(14):2870-80. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt136. Epub 2013 Mar
27.

Global increases in both common and rare copy number load associated with autism.

Girirajan S(1), Johnson RL, Tassone F, Balciuniene J, Katiyar N, Fox K, Baker C, 
Srikanth A, Yeoh KH, Khoo SJ, Nauth TB, Hansen R, Ritchie M, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Eichler EE, Pessah IN, Selleck SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. sxg47@psu.edu

Children with autism have an elevated frequency of large, rare copy number
variants (CNVs). However, the global load of deletions or duplications, per se,
and their size, location and relationship to clinical manifestations of autism
have not been documented. We examined CNV data from 516 individuals with autism
or typical development from the population-based Childhood Autism Risks from
Genetics and Environment (CHARGE) study. We interrogated 120 regions flanked by
segmental duplications (genomic hotspots) for events >50 kbp and the entire
genomic backbone for variants >300 kbp using a custom targeted DNA microarray.
This analysis was complemented by a separate study of five highly dynamic
hotspots associated with autism or developmental delay syndromes, using a finely 
tiled array platform (>1 kbp) in 142 children matched for gender and ethnicity.
In both studies, a significant increase in the number of base pairs of
duplication, but not deletion, was associated with autism. Significantly elevated
levels of CNV load remained after the removal of rare and likely pathogenic
events. Further, the entire CNV load detected with the finely tiled array was
contributed by common variants. The impact of this variation was assessed by
examining the correlation of clinical outcomes with CNV load. The level of
personal and social skills, measured by Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales,
negatively correlated (Spearman's r = -0.13, P = 0.034) with the duplication CNV 
load for the affected children; the strongest association was found for
communication (P = 0.048) and socialization (P = 0.022) scores. We propose that
CNV load, predominantly increased genomic base pairs of duplication, predisposes 
to autism.

PMCID: PMC3690969
PMID: 23535821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059061. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

CNV analysis in Tourette syndrome implicates large genomic rearrangements in
COL8A1 and NRXN1.

Nag A(1), Bochukova EG, Kremeyer B, Campbell DD, Muller H, Valencia-Duarte AV,
Cardona J, Rivas IC, Mesa SC, Cuartas M, Garcia J, Bedoya G, Cornejo W, Herrera
LD, Romero R, Fournier E, Reus VI, Lowe TL, Farooqi IS; Tourette Syndrome
Association International Consortium for Genetics, Mathews CA, McGrath LM, Yu D, 
Cook E, Wang K, Scharf JM, Pauls DL, Freimer NB, Plagnol V, Ruiz-Linares A.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Genetics Institute, Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment,
University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Tourette syndrome (TS) is a neuropsychiatric disorder with a strong genetic
component. However, the genetic architecture of TS remains uncertain. Copy number
variation (CNV) has been shown to contribute to the genetic make-up of several
neurodevelopmental conditions, including schizophrenia and autism. Here we
describe CNV calls using SNP chip genotype data from an initial sample of 210 TS 
cases and 285 controls ascertained in two Latin American populations. After
extensive quality control, we found that cases (N = 179) have a significant
excess (P = 0.006) of large CNV (>500 kb) calls compared to controls (N = 234).
Amongst 24 large CNVs seen only in the cases, we observed four duplications of
the COL8A1 gene region. We also found two cases with [?]400 kb deletions involving 
NRXN1, a gene previously implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders, including
TS. Follow-up using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (and
including 53 more TS cases) validated the CNV calls and identified additional
patients with rearrangements in COL8A1 and NRXN1, but none in controls.
Examination of available parents indicates that two out of three NRXN1 deletions 
detected in the TS cases are de-novo mutations. Our results are consistent with
the proposal that rare CNVs play a role in TS aetiology and suggest a possible
role for rearrangements in the COL8A1 and NRXN1 gene regions.

PMCID: PMC3606459
PMID: 23533600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Front Genet. 2013 Mar 14;4:32. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00032. eCollection 2013.

Sex bias in copy number variation of olfactory receptor gene family depends on
ethnicity.

Shadravan F.

Gender plays a pivotal role in the human genetic identity and is also manifested 
in many genetic disorders particularly mental retardation. In this study its
effect on copy number variation (CNV), known to cause genetic disorders was
explored. As the olfactory receptor (OR) repertoire comprises the largest human
gene family, it was selected for this study, which was carried out within and
between three populations, derived from 150 individuals from the 1000 Genome
Project. Analysis of 3872 CNVs detected among 791 OR loci, in which 307 loci
showed CNV, revealed the following novel findings: Sex bias in CNV was
significantly more prevalent in uncommon than common CNV variants of OR
pseudogenes, in which the male genome showed more CNVs; and in one-copy number
loss compared to complete deletion of OR pseudogenes; both findings implying a
more recent evolutionary role for gender. Sex bias in copy number gain was also
detected. Another novel finding was that the observed sex bias was largely
dependent on ethnicity and was in general absent in East Asians. Using a CNV
public database for sick children (International Standard Cytogenomic Array
Consortium) the application of these findings for improving clinical molecular
diagnostics is discussed by showing an example of sex bias in CNV among kids with
autism. Additional clinical relevance is discussed, as the most polymorphic
CNV-enriched OR cluster in the human genome, located on chr 15q11.2, is found
near the Prader-Willi syndrome/Angelman syndrome bi-directionally imprinted
region associated with two well-known mental retardation syndromes. As olfaction 
represents the primitive cognition in most mammals, arguably in competition with 
the development of a larger brain, the extensive retention of OR pseudogenes in
females of this study, might point to a parent-of-origin indirect regulatory role
for OR pseudogenes in the embryonic development of human brain. Thus any
perturbation in the temporal regulation of olfactory system could lead to
developmental delay disorders including mental retardation.

PMCID: PMC3596775
PMID: 23503716  [PubMed]


59. Autism Res. 2013 Aug;6(4):268-79. doi: 10.1002/aur.1284. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

The interstitial duplication 15q11.2-q13 syndrome includes autism, mild facial
anomalies and a characteristic EEG signature.

Urraca N(1), Cleary J, Brewer V, Pivnick EK, McVicar K, Thibert RL, Schanen NC,
Esmer C, Lamport D, Reiter LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Chromosomal copy number variants (CNV) are the most common genetic lesion found
in autism. Many autism-associated CNVs are duplications of chromosome 15q.
Although most cases of interstitial (int) dup(15) that present clinically are de 
novo and maternally derived or inherited, both pathogenic and unaffected paternal
duplications of 15q have been identified. We performed a phenotype/genotype
analysis of individuals with interstitial 15q duplications to broaden our
understanding of the 15q syndrome and investigate the contribution of 15q
duplication to increased autism risk. All subjects were recruited solely on the
basis of interstitial duplication 15q11.2-q13 status. Comparative array genome
hybridization was used to determine the duplication size and boundaries while the
methylation status of the maternally methylated small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
polypeptide N gene was used to determine the parent of origin of the duplication.
We determined the duplication size and parental origin for 14 int dup(15)
subjects: 10 maternal and 4 paternal cases. The majority of int dup(15) cases
recruited were maternal in origin, most likely due to our finding that maternal
duplication was coincident with autism spectrum disorder. The size of the
duplication did not correlate with the severity of the phenotype as established
by Autism Diagnostic Observation Scale calibrated severity score. We identified
phenotypes not comprehensively described before in this cohort including mild
facial dysmorphism, sleep problems and an unusual electroencephalogram variant.
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the maternally expressed
ubiquitin protein ligase E3A gene is primarily responsible for the autism
phenotype in int dup(15) since all maternal cases tested presented on the autism 
spectrum.

(c) 2013 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3884762
PMID: 23495136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Apr;161A(4):835-40. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35739. Epub 2013
Mar 12.

Partial deletion of ANKRD11 results in the KBG phenotype distinct from the
16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome.

Khalifa M(1), Stein J, Grau L, Nelson V, Meck J, Aradhya S, Duby J.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Department, Akron Children's Hospital, Akron, OH 44308-1062, USA.
mkhalifa@chmca.org

KBG syndrome (OMIM 148050) is a very rare genetic disorder characterized by
macrodontia, distinctive craniofacial abnormalities, short stature, intellectual 
disability, skeletal, and neurologic involvement. Approximately 60 patients have 
been reported since it was first described in 1975. Recently mutations in ANKRD11
have been documented in patients with KBG syndrome, and it has been proposed that
haploinsufficiency of ANKRD11 is the cause of this syndrome. In addition, copy
number variation in the 16q24.3 region that includes ANKRD11 results in a
variable phenotype that overlaps with KBG syndrome and also includes autism
spectrum disorders and other dysmorphic facial features. In this report we
present a 21/2-year-old African American male with features highly suggestive of
KBG syndrome. Genomic microarray identified an intragenic 154 kb deletion at
16q24.3 within ANKRD11. This child's mother was mosaic for the same deletion
(present in approximately 38% of cells) and exhibited a milder phenotype
including macrodontia, short stature and brachydactyly. This family provides
additional evidence that ANKRD11 causes KBG syndrome, and the mild phenotype in
the mosaic form suggests that KBG phenotypes might be dose dependent,
differentiating it from the more variable 16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome. This
family has additional features that might expand the phenotype of KBG syndrome.

Copyright (c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23494856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Mar 7;92(3):375-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.006.

Molecular analysis of a deletion hotspot in the NRXN1 region reveals the
involvement of short inverted repeats in deletion CNVs.

Chen X(1), Shen Y, Zhang F, Chiang C, Pillalamarri V, Blumenthal I, Talkowski M, 
Wu BL, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.

NRXN1 microdeletions occur at a relatively high frequency and confer increased
risk for neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioral abnormalities. The mechanism that
makes NRXN1 a deletion hotspot is unknown. Here, we identified deletions of the
NRXN1 region in affected cohorts, confirming a strong association with the autism
spectrum and other neurodevelopmental disorders. Interestingly, deletions in both
affected and control individuals were clustered in the 5' portion of NRXN1 and
its immediate upstream region. To explore the mechanism of deletion, we mapped
and analyzed the breakpoints of 32 deletions. At the deletion breakpoints,
frequent microhomology (68.8%, 2-19 bp) suggested predominant mechanisms of DNA
replication error and/or microhomology-mediated end-joining. Long terminal repeat
(LTR) elements, unique non-B-DNA structures, and MEME-defined sequence motifs
were significantly enriched, but Alu and LINE sequences were not. Importantly,
small-size inverted repeats (minus self chains, minus sequence motifs, and
partial complementary sequences) were significantly overrepresented in the
vicinity of NRXN1 region deletion breakpoints, suggesting that, although they are
not interrupted by the deletion process, such inverted repeats can predispose a
region to genomic instability by mediating single-strand DNA looping via the
annealing of partially reverse complementary strands and the promoting of DNA
replication fork stalling and DNA replication error. Our observations highlight
the potential importance of inverted repeats of variable sizes in generating a
rearrangement hotspot in which individual breakpoints are not recurrent.
Mechanisms that involve short inverted repeats in initiating deletion may also
apply to other deletion hotspots in the human genome.

Copyright (c) 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3591860
PMID: 23472757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056639. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Lack of association between NLGN3, NLGN4, SHANK2 and SHANK3 gene variants and
autism spectrum disorder in a Chinese population.

Liu Y(1), Du Y, Liu W, Yang C, Liu Y, Wang H, Gong X.

Author information: 
(1)The MOE Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology and State Key Laboratory
of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
deficits in social communication, absence or delay in language development, and
stereotyped or repetitive behaviors. Genetic studies show that
neurexin-neuroligin (NRXN-NLGN) pathway genes contribute susceptibility to ASD,
which include cell adhesion molecules NLGN3, NLGN4 and scaffolding proteins
SHANK2 and SHANK3. Neuroligin proteins play an important role in synaptic
function and trans-synaptic signaling by interacting with presynaptic neurexins. 
Shank proteins are scaffolding molecules of excitatory synapses, which function
as central organizers of the postsynaptic density. Sequence level mutations and
structural variations in these genes have been identified in ASD cases, while few
studies were performed in Chinese population. In this study, we examined the copy
numbers of four genes NLGN4, NLGN3, SHANK2, and SHANK3 in 285 ASD cases using
multiplex fluorescence competitive polymerase chain reaction (PCR). We also
screened the regulatory region including the promoter region and 5'/3'
untranslated regions (UTR) and the entire coding region of NLGN4 in a cohort of
285 ASD patients and 384 controls by direct sequencing of genomic DNA using the
Sanger method. DNA copy number calculation in four genes showed no deletion or
duplication in our cases. No missense mutations in NLGN4 were identified in our
cohort. Association analysis of 6 common SNPs in NLGN4 did not find significant
difference between ASD cases and controls. These findings showed that these genes
may not be major disease genes in Chinese ASD cases.

PMCID: PMC3582503
PMID: 23468870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 May;56(5):256-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.02.006. Epub 2013
Feb 27.

Familial KANK1 deletion that does not follow expected imprinting pattern.

Vanzo RJ(1), Martin MM, Sdano MR, South ST.

Author information: 
(1)Lineagen, Inc., 423 Wakara Way, Ste 200, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, United
States. rvanzo@lineagen.com

Deletion of the KANK1 gene (also called ANKRD15), located at chromosome position 
9p24.3, has been associated with neurodevelopmental disease including congenital 
cerebral palsy, hypotonia, quadriplegia, and intellectual disability in a
four-generation family. The inheritance pattern in this family was suggested to
be maternal imprinting, as all affected individuals inherited the deletion from
their fathers and monoallelic protein expression was observed. We present a
family in which the proband's phenotype, including autism spectrum disorder,
motor delay, and intellectual disability, is consistent with this previous report
of KANK1 deletions. However, a paternally inherited deletion in the proband's
unaffected sibling did not support maternal imprinting. This family raises
consideration of further complexity of the KANK1 locus, including variable
expressivity, incomplete penetrance, and the additive effects of additional
genomic variants or the potential benign nature of inherited copy number
variations (CNVs). However, when considered with the previous publication, our
case also suggests that KANK1 may be subject to random monoallelic expression as 
a possible mode of inheritance. It is also important to consider that KANK1 has
two alternately spliced transcripts, A and B. These have differential tissue
expression and thus potentially differential clinical significance. Based upon
cases in the literature, the present case, and information in the Database of
Genomic Variants, it is possible that only aberrations of variant A contribute to
neurodevelopmental disease. The familial deletion in this present case does not
support maternal imprinting as an inheritance pattern. We suggest that other
inheritance patterns and caveats should be considered when evaluating KANK1
deletions, which may become increasingly recognized through whole genome
microarray testing, whole genome sequencing, and whole exome sequencing
techniques.

Copyright (c) 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23454270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56781. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056781. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Insights on the functional impact of microRNAs present in autism-associated copy 
number variants.

Vaishnavi V(1), Manikandan M, Tiwary BK, Munirajan AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dr. ALM PG Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Autism spectrum disorder is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder that appears
during the first three years of infancy and lasts throughout a person's life.
Recently a large category of genomic structural variants, denoted as copy number 
variants (CNVs), were established to be a major contributor of the
pathophysiology of autism. To date almost all studies have focussed only on the
genes present in the CNV loci, but the impact of non-coding regulatory microRNAs 
(miRNAs) present in these regions remain largely unexplored. Hence we attempted
to elucidate the biological and functional significance of miRNAs present in
autism-associated CNV loci and their target genes by using a series of
computational tools. We demonstrate that nearly 11% of the CNV loci harbor miRNAs
and a few of these miRNAs were previously reported to be associated with autism. 
A systematic analysis of the CNV-miRNAs based on their interactions with the
target genes enabled the identification of top 10 miRNAs namely hsa-miR-590-3p,
hsa-miR-944, hsa-miR-570, hsa-miR-34a, hsa-miR-124, hsa-miR-548f, hsa-miR-429,
hsa-miR-200b, hsa-miR-195 and hsa-miR-497 as hub molecules. Further, the
CNV-miRNAs formed a regulatory loop with transcription factors and their
downstream target genes, and annotation of these target genes indicated their
functional involvement in neurodevelopment and synapse. Moreover, miRNAs present 
in deleted and duplicated CNV loci may explain the difference in dosage of the
crucial genes controlled by them. These CNV-miRNAs can also impair the global
processing and biogenesis of all miRNAs by targeting key molecules in the miRNA
pathway. To our knowledge, this is the first report to highlight the significance
of CNV-microRNAs and their target genes to contribute towards the genetic
heterogeneity and phenotypic variability of autism.

PMCID: PMC3581547
PMID: 23451085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. S D Med. 2013;Spec no:58-65.

A brief history of autism, the autism/vaccine hypothesis and a review of the
genetic basis of autism spectrum disorders.

Blake J(1), Hoyme HE, Crotwell PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Sanford School of Medicine, University of South
Dakota, Sioux Falls, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) represent a common spectrum of developmental
disabilities, sharing deficits in social interactions, communication and
restricted interests or repetitive behaviors with difficult transitions. In this 
article, we review the history of the identification and classification of autism
and the origin of the now widely-debunked autism/vaccine hypothesis. The
differences between syndromal (complex) and non-syndromal (essential) autism are 
described and illustrated with case descriptions where appropriate. Finally, the 
evidence that autism is fundamentally a genetic disease is discussed, including
family studies, the role of DNA copy number variation and known single gene
mutations.

PMID: 23444593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Apr;161A(4):845-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35754. Epub 2013
Feb 26.

Co-occurrence of autism, childhood psychosis, and intellectual disability
associated with a de novo 3q29 microdeletion.

Sagar A(1), Bishop JR, Tessman DC, Guter S, Martin CL, Cook EH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Juvenile Research, Department of Psychiatry, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60608, UWQ. asagar@psych.uic.edu

Some copy number variants (CNVs) are strongly implicated in both schizophrenia
and autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) occurs 
rarely with 0.1-1% of all schizophrenia diagnoses manifesting before age 10. 3q29
deletions are associated with both autism and schizophrenia, and are rare-the
frequency of the deletion estimated to be 1 in 1,750 in developmental disorders. 
Only one patient with a 3q29 deletion was identified out of the first 1,174
families with ASDs included in the Simons Simplex Collection (SSC). We report on 
detailed clinical findings for this patient with a de novo 3q29 deletion who, as 
a young child, developed a very rare overlap of symptoms of both autism and early
onset psychosis. His ASD was first diagnosed at the age of 4 years and his
psychotic symptoms began at 5 years old. This is only the second case reported
thus far of this rare event of co-occurring autism and very early onset psychosis
in a child with a 3q29 deletion. It is also the earliest case of a child with
autism developing comorbid psychosis-manifesting by the age of 5 years.

Copyright (c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3685481
PMID: 23443968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):234-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2555.

Interpreting the role of de novo protein-coding mutations in neuropsychiatric
disease.

Gratten J(1), Visscher PM, Mowry BJ, Wray NR.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. j.gratten1@uq.edu.au

Pedigree, linkage and association studies are consistent with heritable variation
for complex disease due to the segregation of genetic factors in families and in 
the population. In contrast, de novo mutations make only minor contributions to
heritability estimates for complex traits. Nonetheless, some de novo variants are
known to be important in disease etiology. The identification of risk-conferring 
de novo variants will contribute to the discovery of etiologically relevant genes
and pathways and may help in genetic counseling. There is considerable interest
in the role of such mutations in complex neuropsychiatric disease, largely driven
by new genotyping and sequencing technologies. An important role for large de
novo copy number variations has been established. Recently, whole-exome
sequencing has been used to extend the investigation of de novo variation to
point mutations in protein-coding regions. Here, we consider several challenges
for the interpretation of such mutations in the context of their role in
neuropsychiatric disease.

PMID: 23438595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biostatistics. 2013 Jul;14(3):600-11. doi: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxt003. Epub
2013 Feb 20.

Quantifying copy number variations using a hidden Markov model with inhomogeneous
emission distributions.

McCallum KJ(1), Wang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.
kennethmccallum2013@u.northwestern.edu

Copy number variations (CNVs) are a significant source of genetic variation and
have been found frequently associated with diseases such as cancers and autism.
High-throughput sequencing data are increasingly being used to detect and
quantify CNVs; however, the distributional properties of the data are not fully
understood. A hidden Markov model (HMM) is proposed using inhomogeneous emission 
distributions based on negative binomial regression to account for the sequencing
biases. The model is tested on the whole genome sequencing data and simulated
data sets. An algorithm for CNV detection is implemented in the R package
CNVfinder. The model based on negative binomial regression is shown to provide a 
good fit to the data and provides competitive performance compared with methods
based on normalization of read counts.

PMID: 23428932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2013;139(3):181-8. doi: 10.1159/000347053. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Somatic cell genomics of brain disorders: a new opportunity to clarify
genetic-environmental interactions.

Iourov IY(1), Vorsanova SG, Yurov YB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Mental Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,
RU-119152 Moscow, Russia. ivan.iourov@gmail.com

Recent genomic advances have exacerbated the problem of interpreting genome-wide 
association studies aimed at uncovering genetic basis of brain disorders. Despite
of a plethora of data on candidate genes determining the susceptibility to
neuropsychiatric diseases, no consensus is reached on their intrinsic
contribution to the pathogenesis, and the influence of the environment on these
genes is incompletely understood. Alternatively, single-cell analyses of the
normal and diseased human brain have shown that somatic genome/epigenome
variations (somatic mosaicism) do affect neuronal cell populations and are likely
to mediate pathogenic processes associated with brain dysfunctions. Such
(epi-)genomic changes are likely to arise from disturbances in genome maintenance
and cell cycle regulation pathways as well as from environmental exposures.
Therefore, one can suggest that, at least in a proportion of cases, inter- and
intragenic variations (copy number variations (CNVs) or single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs)) associated with major brain disorders (i.e. schizophrenia, 
Alzheimer's disease, autism) lead to genetic dysregulation resulting in somatic
genetic and epigenetic mosaicism. In addition, environmental influences on
malfunctioning cellular machinery could trigger a cascade of abnormal processes
producing genomic/chromosomal instability (i.e. brain-specific aneuploidy). Here,
a brief analysis of a genome-wide association database has allowed us to support 
these speculations. Accordingly, an ontogenetic 2-/multiple-hit mechanism of
brain diseases was hypothesized. Finally, we speculate that somatic cell genomics
approach considering both genome-wide associations and somatic (epi-)genomic
variations is likely to have bright perspectives for disease-oriented genome
research.

Copyright (c) 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23428498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Med Genet. 2013 Apr;50(4):203-11. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101519. Epub 2013
Feb 9.

From the periphery to centre stage: de novo single nucleotide variants play a key
role in human genetic disease.

Ku CS(1), Tan EK, Cooper DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm 17177, Sweden. cheeseng.ku@ki.se

Human germline mutations arise anew during meiosis in every generation. Such
spontaneously occurring genetic variants are termed de novo mutations. Although
the introduction of microarray based approaches led to the discovery of numerous 
de novo copy number variants underlying a range of human genetic conditions, de
novo single nucleotide variants (SNVs) remained refractory to analysis at the
whole genome level until the advent of next generation sequencing technologies
such as whole genome sequencing and whole exome sequencing. These approaches have
recently allowed the estimation of the mutation rate of de novo SNVs and greatly 
increased our understanding of their contribution to human genetic disease.
Indeed, de novo SNVs have been found to underlie various common human
neurodevelopmental conditions such as schizophrenia, autism and intellectual
disability, as well as sporadic cases of rare Mendelian disorders. In many cases,
however, confirmation of the pathogenicity of identified de novo SNVs remains a
major challenge.

PMID: 23396985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Feb 7;92(2):221-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.12.016. Epub
2013 Jan 31.

Refinement and discovery of new hotspots of copy-number variation associated with
autism spectrum disorder.

Girirajan S(1), Dennis MY, Baker C, Malig M, Coe BP, Campbell CD, Mark K, Vu TH, 
Alkan C, Cheng Z, Biesecker LG, Bernier R, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,
USA.

Rare copy-number variants (CNVs) have been implicated in autism and intellectual 
disability. These variants are large and affect many genes but lack clear
specificity toward autism as opposed to developmental-delay phenotypes. We
exploited the repeat architecture of the genome to target segmental
duplication-mediated rearrangement hotspots (n = 120, median size 1.78 Mbp, range
240 kbp to 13 Mbp) and smaller hotspots flanked by repetitive sequence (n =
1,247, median size 79 kbp, range 3-96 kbp) in 2,588 autistic individuals from
simplex and multiplex families and in 580 controls. Our analysis identified
several recurrent large hotspot events, including association with 1q21
duplications, which are more likely to be identified in individuals with autism
than in those with developmental delay (p = 0.01; OR = 2.7). Within larger
hotspots, we also identified smaller atypical CNVs that implicated CHD1L and
ACACA for the 1q21 and 17q12 deletions, respectively. Our analysis, however,
suggested no overall increase in the burden of smaller hotspots in autistic
individuals as compared to controls. By focusing on gene-disruptive events, we
identified recurrent CNVs, including DPP10, PLCB1, TRPM1, NRXN1, FHIT, and HYDIN,
that are enriched in autism. We found that as the size of deletions increases,
nonverbal IQ significantly decreases, but there is no impact on autism severity; 
and as the size of duplications increases, autism severity significantly
increases but nonverbal IQ is not affected. The absence of an increased burden of
smaller CNVs in individuals with autism and the failure of most large hotspots to
refine to single genes is consistent with a model where imbalance of multiple
genes contributes to a disease state.

Copyright (c) 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3567267
PMID: 23375656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Clin Genet. 2013 Dec;84(6):560-5. doi: 10.1111/cge.12105. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Dysfunction of SHANK2 and CHRNA7 in a patient with intellectual disability and
language impairment supports genetic epistasis of the two loci.

Chilian B(1), Abdollahpour H, Bierhals T, Haltrich I, Fekete G, Nagel I,
Rosenberger G, Kutsche K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.

Synaptopathies constitute a group of neurological diseases including autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID). They have been
associated with mutations in genes encoding proteins important for the formation 
and stabilization of synapses, such as SHANK1-3. Loss-of-function mutations in
the SHANK genes have been identified in individuals with ASD and ID suggesting
that other factors modify the neurological phenotype. We report a boy with severe
ID, behavioral anomalies, and language impairment who carries a balanced de novo 
triple translocation 46,XY,t(11;17;19)(q13.3;q25.1;q13.42). The 11q13.3
breakpoint was found to disrupt the SHANK2 gene. The patient also carries copy
number variations at 15q13.3 and 10q22.11 encompassing ARHGAP11B and two synaptic
genes. The CHRNA7 gene encoding a7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit and
the GPRIN2 gene encoding G-protein-regulated inducer of neurite growth 2 were
duplicated. Co-occurrence of a de novo SHANK2 mutation and a CHRNA7 duplication
in two reported patients with ASD and ID as well as in the patient with
t(11;17;19), severe ID and behavior problems suggests convergence of these genes 
on a common synaptic pathway. Our results strengthen the oligogenic inheritance
model and highlight the presence of a large effect mutation and modifier genes
collectively determining phenotypic expression of the synaptopathy.

(c) 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23350639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052239. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Identification of rare recurrent copy number variants in high-risk autism
families and their prevalence in a large ASD population.

Matsunami N(1), Hadley D, Hensel CH, Christensen GB, Kim C, Frackelton E, Thomas 
K, da Silva RP, Stevens J, Baird L, Otterud B, Ho K, Varvil T, Leppert T, Lambert
CG, Leppert M, Hakonarson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Structural variation is thought to play a major etiological role in the
development of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), and numerous studies documenting
the relevance of copy number variants (CNVs) in ASD have been published since
2006. To determine if large ASD families harbor high-impact CNVs that may have
broader impact in the general ASD population, we used the Affymetrix genome-wide 
human SNP array 6.0 to identify 153 putative autism-specific CNVs present in 55
individuals with ASD from 9 multiplex ASD pedigrees. To evaluate the actual
prevalence of these CNVs as well as 185 CNVs reportedly associated with ASD from 
published studies many of which are insufficiently powered, we designed a custom 
Illumina array and used it to interrogate these CNVs in 3,000 ASD cases and 6,000
controls. Additional single nucleotide variants (SNVs) on the array identified 25
CNVs that we did not detect in our family studies at the standard SNP array
resolution. After molecular validation, our results demonstrated that 15 CNVs
identified in high-risk ASD families also were found in two or more ASD cases
with odds ratios greater than 2.0, strengthening their support as ASD risk
variants. In addition, of the 25 CNVs identified using SNV probes on our custom
array, 9 also had odds ratios greater than 2.0, suggesting that these CNVs also
are ASD risk variants. Eighteen of the validated CNVs have not been reported
previously in individuals with ASD and three have only been observed once.
Finally, we confirmed the association of 31 of 185 published ASD-associated CNVs 
in our dataset with odds ratios greater than 2.0, suggesting they may be of
clinical relevance in the evaluation of children with ASDs. Taken together, these
data provide strong support for the existence and application of high-impact CNVs
in the clinical genetic evaluation of children with ASD.

PMCID: PMC3544904
PMID: 23341896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Med Genet. 2013 Mar;50(3):163-73. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101288. Epub 2013
Jan 18.

Deletions in 16q24.2 are associated with autism spectrum disorder, intellectual
disability and congenital renal malformation.

Handrigan GR(1), Chitayat D, Lionel AC, Pinsk M, Vaags AK, Marshall CR, Dyack S, 
Escobar LF, Fernandez BA, Stegman JC, Rosenfeld JA, Shaffer LG, Goodenberger M,
Hodge JC, Cain JE, Babul-Hirji R, Stavropoulos DJ, Yiu V, Scherer SW, Rosenblum
ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G1X8. norman.rosenblum@sickkids.ca

Erratum in
    J Med Genet. 2013 Apr;50(4):270.

BACKGROUND: The contribution of copy-number variation (CNV) to disease has been
highlighted with the widespread adoption of array-based comparative genomic
hybridisation (aCGH) and microarray technology. Contiguous gene deletions
involving ANKRD11 in 16q24.3 are associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
and intellectual disability (ID), while 16q24.1 deletions affecting FOXF1 are
associated with congenital renal malformations, alveolar capillary dysplasia, and
various other abnormalities. The disease associations of deletions in the
intervening region, 16q24.2, have only been defined to a limited extent.
AIM: To determine whether deletions affecting 16q24.2 are correlated with
congenital anomalies.
METHODS: 35 individuals, each having a deletion in 16q24.2, were characterised
clinically and by aCGH and/or SNP-genotyping microarray.
RESULTS: Several of the 35 16q24.2 deletions identified here closely abut or
overlap the coding regions of FOXF1 and ANKRD11, two genes that have been
previously associated with the disease. 25 patients were reported to have ASD/ID,
and three were found to have bilateral hydronephrosis. 14 of the deletions
associated with ASD/ID overlap the coding regions of FBXO31 and MAP1LC3B. These
same genes and two others, C16orf95 and ZCCHC14, are also included in the area of
minimal overlap of the three deletions associated with hydronephrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data highlight 16q24.2 as a region of interest for ASD, ID and
congenital renal malformations. These conditions are associated, albeit without
complete penetrance, with deletions affecting C16orf95, ZCCHC14, MAP1LC3B and
FBXO31. The function of each gene in development and disease warrants further
investigation.

PMID: 23335808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013 Mar;70(3):253-60. doi: 10.1001/2013.jamapsychiatry.71.

Implication of a rare deletion at distal 16p11.2 in schizophrenia.

Guha S(1), Rees E, Darvasi A, Ivanov D, Ikeda M, Bergen SE, Magnusson PK,
Cormican P, Morris D, Gill M, Cichon S, Rosenfeld JA, Lee A, Gregersen PK, Kane
JM, Malhotra AK, Rietschel M, Nothen MM, Degenhardt F, Priebe L, Breuer R,
Strohmaier J, Ruderfer DM, Moran JL, Chambert KD, Sanders AR, Shi J, Kendler K,
Riley B, O'Neill T, Walsh D, Malhotra D, Corvin A, Purcell S, Sklar P, Iwata N,
Hultman CM, Sullivan PF, Sebat J, McCarthy S, Gejman PV, Levinson DF, Owen MJ,
O'Donovan MC, Lencz T, Kirov G; Molecular Genetics of Schizophrenia Consortium;
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychiatry Research, The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, New 
York 11004, USA.

CONTEXT: Large genomic copy number variations have been implicated as strong risk
factors for schizophrenia. However, the rarity of these events has created
challenges for the identification of further pathogenic loci, and extremely large
samples are required to provide convincing replication.
OBJECTIVE: To detect novel copy number variations that increase the
susceptibility to schizophrenia by using 2 ethnically homogeneous discovery
cohorts and replication in large samples.
DESIGN: Genetic association study of microarray data.
SETTING: Samples of DNA were collected at 9 sites from different countries.
PARTICIPANTS: Two discovery cohorts consisted of 790 cases with schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder and 1347 controls of Ashkenazi Jewish descent and 662
parent-offspring trios from Bulgaria, of which the offspring had schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder. Replication data sets consisted of 12,398 cases and
17,945 controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Statistically increased rate of specific copy number
variations in cases vs controls.
RESULTS: One novel locus was implicated: a deletion at distal 16p11.2, which does
not overlap the proximal 16p11.2 locus previously reported in schizophrenia and
autism. Deletions at this locus were found in 13 of 13,850 cases (0.094%) and 3
of 19,954 controls (0.015%) (odds ratio, 6.25 [95% CI, 1.78-21.93]; P = .001,
Fisher exact test).
CONCLUSIONS: Deletions at distal 16p11.2 have been previously implicated in
developmental delay and obesity. The region contains 9 genes, several of which
are implicated in neurological diseases, regulation of body weight, and glucose
homeostasis. A telomeric extension of the deletion, observed in about half the
cases but no controls, potentially implicates an additional 8 genes. Our findings
add a new locus to the list of copy number variations that increase the risk for 
development of schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3750982
PMID: 23325106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Hum Genet. 2013 Apr;132(4):443-50. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1261-4. Epub 2013 Jan 
13.

Increased paternal age and the influence on burden of genomic copy number
variation in the general population.

Buizer-Voskamp JE(1), Blauw HM, Boks MP, van Eijk KR, Veldink JH, Hennekam EA,
Vorstman JA, Mulder F, Tiemeier H, Uitterlinden AG, Kiemeney LA, van den Berg LH,
Kahn RS, Sabatti C, Ophoff RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
J.E.Buizer@umcutrecht.nl

Genomic copy number variations (CNVs) and increased parental age are both
associated with the risk to develop a variety of clinical neuropsychiatric
disorders such as autism, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. At the same time,
it has been shown that the rate of transmitted de novo single nucleotide
mutations is increased with paternal age. To address whether paternal age also
affects the burden of structural genomic deletions and duplications, we examined 
various types of CNV burden in a large population sample from the Netherlands.
Healthy participants with parental age information (n = 6,773) were collected at 
different University Medical Centers. CNVs were called with the PennCNV algorithm
using Illumina genome-wide SNP array data. We observed no evidence in support of 
a paternal age effect on CNV load in the offspring. Our results were negative for
global measures as well as several proxies for de novo CNV events in this unique 
sample. While recent studies suggest de novo single nucleotide mutation rate to
be dominated by the age of the father at conception, our results strongly suggest
that at the level of global CNV burden there is no influence of increased
paternal age. While it remains possible that local genomic effects may exist for 
specific phenotypes, this study indicates that global CNV burden and increased
father's age may be independent disease risk factors.

PMID: 23315237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e37385. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037385. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Genetic copy number variation and general cognitive ability.

MacLeod AK(1), Davies G, Payton A, Tenesa A, Harris SE, Liewald D, Ke X, Luciano 
M, Lopez LM, Gow AJ, Corley J, Redmond P, McNeill G, Pickles A, Ollier W, Horan
M, Starr JM, Pendleton N, Thomson PA, Porteous DJ, Deary IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. andrew.macleod@ed.ac.uk

Differences in genomic structure between individuals are ubiquitous features of
human genetic variation. Specific copy number variants (CNVs) have been
associated with susceptibility to numerous complex psychiatric disorders,
including attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder, autism-spectrum disorders and
schizophrenia. These disorders often display co-morbidity with low intelligence. 
Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications are associated with these disorders, 
so it has been suggested that these deletions or duplications may be associated
with differences in intelligence. Here we investigate associations between large 
([?]500kb), rare (<1% population frequency) CNVs and both fluid and crystallized
intelligence in community-dwelling older people. We observe no significant
associations between intelligence and total CNV load. Examining individual CNV
regions previously implicated in neuropsychological disorders, we find suggestive
evidence that CNV regions around SHANK3 are associated with fluid intelligence as
derived from a battery of cognitive tests. This is the first study to examine the
effects of rare CNVs as called by multiple algorithms on cognition in a large
non-clinical sample, and finds no effects of such variants on general cognitive
ability.

PMCID: PMC3530597
PMID: 23300510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Br J Psychiatry. 2013 Jan;202(1):5-6. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.112.109579.

Structural and copy number variants in the human genome: implications for
psychiatry.

St Clair D.

Copy number variants are small chromosomal deletions and duplications. When they 
alter the dose of genes critical for normal brain development and adult brain
functioning they may cause severe disorders such as autism and schizophrenia.
Numerous such loci have recently been identified. They are offering amazing leads
for neuropsychiatric research.

PMID: 23284145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Psychiatr Genet. 2013 Apr;23(2):61-9. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32835d718b.

Copy number variation findings among 50 children and adolescents with autism
spectrum disorder.

Sorte HS(1), Gjevik E, Sponheim E, Eiklid KL, Rodningen OK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a heterogeneous group of
neurodevelopment disorders with a complex genetic aetiology. The aim of this
study was to identify copy number variations (CNVs) with a clinical significance 
for ASD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Array-based comparative genomic hybridization was applied 
to detect CNVs in a clinically well-characterized population of 50 children and
adolescents with ASD.
RESULTS: Nine CNVs with predicted clinical significance were identified among
eight individuals (detection rate 16%). Three of the CNVs are recurrently
associated with ASDs (15q11.2q13.1) or have been identified in ASD populations
[3p14.2 and t(8;12)(p23.1;p13.31)]. The remaining regions (15q11.2, 10q21.1,
Xp22.2, 16p13.3 and 22q13.1) have not been reported previously as candidate genes
for ASD.
CONCLUSION: This study identified five novel CNVs among the individuals. The
causal relationship between identified CNVs and the ASD phenotype is not fully
established. However, the genes involved are associated with ASD and/or other
neuropsychiatric disorders, or implicated in synaptic and neuronal activity, thus
suggesting clinical significance. Further identification of ASD-associated CNVs
is required, together with a broad clinical characterization of affected
individuals to identify genotype-phenotype correlations.

PMID: 23277134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Dec;2(12):1665-85. doi: 10.1534/g3.112.004689. Epub 2012 Dec 
1.

A discovery resource of rare copy number variations in individuals with autism
spectrum disorder.

Prasad A(1), Merico D, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Wei J, Lionel AC, Sato D, Rickaby J,
Lu C, Szatmari P, Roberts W, Fernandez BA, Marshall CR, Hatchwell E, Eis PS,
Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics, Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto M5G 1L7, Canada.

The identification of rare inherited and de novo copy number variations (CNVs) in
human subjects has proven a productive approach to highlight risk genes for
autism spectrum disorder (ASD). A variety of microarrays are available to detect 
CNVs, including single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays and comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) arrays. Here, we examine a cohort of 696 unrelated
ASD cases using a high-resolution one-million feature CGH microarray, the
majority of which were previously genotyped with SNP arrays. Our objective was to
discover new CNVs in ASD cases that were not detected by SNP microarray analysis 
and to delineate novel ASD risk loci via combined analysis of CGH and SNP array
data sets on the ASD cohort and CGH data on an additional 1000 control samples.
Of the 615 ASD cases analyzed on both SNP and CGH arrays, we found that 13,572 of
21,346 (64%) of the CNVs were exclusively detected by the CGH array. Several of
the CGH-specific CNVs are rare in population frequency and impact previously
reported ASD genes (e.g., NRXN1, GRM8, DPYD), as well as novel ASD candidate
genes (e.g., CIB2, DAPP1, SAE1), and all were inherited except for a de novo CNV 
in the GPHN gene. A functional enrichment test of gene-sets in ASD cases over
controls revealed nucleotide metabolism as a potential novel pathway involved in 
ASD, which includes several candidate genes for follow-up (e.g., DPYD, UPB1,
UPP1, TYMP). Finally, this extensively phenotyped and genotyped ASD clinical
cohort serves as an invaluable resource for the next step of genome sequencing
for complete genetic variation detection.

PMCID: PMC3516488
PMID: 23275889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Dec 16. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.158. [Epub ahead of print]

Common polygenic variation and risk for childhood-onset schizophrenia.

Ahn K(1), An SS(2), Shugart YY(3), Rapoport JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Childhood Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Department of Environmental Health
Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
MD, USA. (3)Unit of Statistical Genomics, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) is a rare and severe form of the disorder,
with more striking abnormalities with respect to prepsychotic developmental
disorders and abnormities in the brain development compared with later-onset
schizophrenia. We previously documented that COS patients, compared with their
healthy siblings and with adult-onset patients (AOS), carry significantly more
rare chromosomal copy number variations, spanning large genomic regions (>100 kb)
(Ahn et al. 2014). Here, we interrogated the contribution of common polygenic
variation to the genetic susceptibility for schizophrenia. We examined the
association between a direct measure of genetic risk of schizophrenia in 130 COS 
probands and 103 healthy siblings. Using data from the schizophrenia and autism
GWAS of the Psychiatric Genomic Consortia, we selected three risk-related sets of
single nucleotide polymorphisms from which we conducted polygenic risk score
comparisons for COS probands and their healthy siblings. COS probands had higher 
genetic risk scores of both schizophrenia and autism than their siblings
(P<0.05). Given the small sample size, these findings suggest that COS patients
have more salient genetic risk than do AOS.Molecular Psychiatry advance online
publication, 16 December 2014; doi:10.1038/mp.2014.158.

PMID: 25510512  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;72(2):119-26. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.2147.

The role of parental cognitive, behavioral, and motor profiles in clinical
variability in individuals with chromosome 16p11.2 deletions.

Moreno-De-Luca A(1), Evans DW(2), Boomer KB(3), Hanson E(4), Bernier R(5),
Goin-Kochel RP(6), Myers SM(7), Challman TD(7), Moreno-De-Luca D(8), Slane MM(9),
Hare AE(9), Chung WK(10), Spiro JE(11), Faucett WA(12), Martin CL(12), Ledbetter 
DH(13).

Author information: 
(1)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System,
Lewisburg, Pennsylvania2Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, Pennsylvania3Department of Radiology, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, Pennsylvania4Program in N. (2)Autism and Developmental Medicine
Institute, Geisinger Health System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania4Program in
Neuroscience, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania5Department of
Psychology, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of
Mathematics, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. (4)Division of
Developmental Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts8Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas. (7)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health 
System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania4Program in Neuroscience, Bucknell University,
Lewisburg, Pennsylvania11Department of Pediatrics, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, Pennsylvania. (8)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut. (9)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health
System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. (10)Simons Foundation, New York, New
York14Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, New
York15Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York. (11)Simons
Foundation, New York, New York. (12)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, 
Geisinger Health System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania2Genomic Medicine Institute,
Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania. (13)Autism and Developmental
Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania2Genomic
Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania4Program in
Neuroscience, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania.

Comment in
    JAMA Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;72(2):106-7.

IMPORTANCE: Most disorders caused by copy number variants (CNVs) display
significant clinical variability, often referred to as incomplete penetrance and 
variable expressivity. Genetic and environmental sources of this variability are 
not well understood.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the contributors to phenotypic variability in probands
with CNVs involving the same genomic region; to measure the effect size for de
novo mutation events; and to explore the contribution of familial background to
resulting cognitive, behavioral, and motor performance outcomes in probands with 
de novo CNVs.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Family-based study design with a volunteer
sample of 56 individuals with de novo 16p11.2 deletions and their noncarrier
parents and siblings from the Simons Variation in Individuals Project.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: We used linear mixed-model analysis to measure effect
size and intraclass correlation to determine the influence of family background
for a de novo CNV on quantitative traits representing the following 3
neurodevelopmental domains: cognitive ability (Full-Scale IQ), social behavior
(Social Responsiveness Scale), and neuromotor performance (Purdue Pegboard Test).
We included an anthropometric trait, body mass index, for comparison.
RESULTS: A significant deleterious effect of the 16p11.2 deletion was
demonstrated across all domains. Relative to the biparental mean, the effect
sizes were -1.7 SD for cognitive ability, 2.2 SD for social behavior, and -1.3 SD
for neuromotor performance (P < .001). Despite large deleterious effects,
significant positive correlations between parents and probands were preserved for
the Full-Scale IQ (0.42 [P = .03]), the verbal IQ (0.53 [P = .004]), and the
Social Responsiveness Scale (0.52 [P = .009]) scores. We also observed a 1-SD
increase in the body mass index of probands compared with siblings, with an
intraclass correlation of 0.40 (P = .07).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Analysis of families with de novo CNVs provides the
least confounded estimate of the effect size of the 16p11.2 deletion on
heritable, quantitative traits and demonstrates a 1- to 2-SD effect across all
neurodevelopmental dimensions. Significant parent-proband correlations indicate
that family background contributes to the phenotypic variability seen in this and
perhaps other CNV disorders and may have implications for counseling families
regarding their children's developmental and psychiatric prognoses. Use of
biparental mean scores rather than general population mean scores may be more
relevant to examine the effect of a mutation or any other cause of trait
variation on a neurodevelopmental outcome and possibly on systems of diagnosis
and trait ascertainment for developmental disorders.

PMID: 25493922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hum Genet. 2015 Feb;134(2):191-201. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1513-6. Epub 2014 Nov
29.

Using extended pedigrees to identify novel autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
candidate genes.

Woodbury-Smith M(1), Paterson AD, Thiruvahindrapduram B, Lionel AC, Marshall CR, 
Merico D, Fernandez BA, Duku E, Sutcliffe JS, O'Conner I, Chrysler C, Thompson A,
Kellam B, Tammimies K, Walker S, Yuen RK, Uddin M, Howe JL, Parlier M, Whitten K,
Szatmari P, Vieland VJ, Piven J, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University,
Chedoke Campus (Evel Building, Room 457), Hamilton, ON, Canada,
woodbur@mcmaster.ca.

Copy number variation has emerged as an important cause of phenotypic variation, 
particularly in relation to some complex disorders. Autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) is one such disorder, in which evidence is emerging for an etiological role
for some rare penetrant de novo and rare inherited copy number variants (CNVs).
De novo variation, however, does not always explain the familial nature of ASD,
leaving a gap in our knowledge concerning the heritable genetic causes of this
disorder. Extended pedigrees, in which several members have ASD, provide an
opportunity to investigate inherited genetic risk factors. In this current study,
we recruited 19 extended ASD pedigrees, and, using the Illumina HumanOmni2.5
BeadChip, conducted genome-wide CNV interrogation. We found no definitive
evidence of an etiological role for segregating CNVs in these pedigrees, and no
evidence that linkage signals in these pedigrees are explained by segregating
CNVs. However, a small number of putative de novo variants were transmitted from 
BAP parents to their ASD offspring, and evidence emerged for a rare duplication
CNV at 11p13.3 harboring two putative 'developmental/neuropsychiatric'
susceptibility gene(s), GSTP1 and NDUFV1.

PMID: 25432440  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Nov 25. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.150. [Epub ahead of print]

The phenotypic manifestations of rare genic CNVs in autism spectrum disorder.

Merikangas AK(1), Segurado R(2), Heron EA(1), Anney RJ(1), Paterson AD(3), Cook
EH(4), Pinto D(5), Scherer SW(6), Szatmari P(7), Gill M(1), Corvin AP(1),
Gallagher L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Neuropsychiatric Genetics Research Group, Institute 
of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland. (2)Centre for
Support and Training in Analysis and Research, University College Dublin, Dublin 
4, Ireland. (3)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick
Children, Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Institute for Juvenile Research,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry, and Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Seaver Autism
Center, The Mindich Child Health & Development Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (6)Department of Molecular Genetics, 
The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (7)The
Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Significant evidence exists for the association between copy number variants
(CNVs) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD); however, most of this work has focused
solely on the diagnosis of ASD. There is limited understanding of the impact of
CNVs on the 'sub-phenotypes' of ASD. The objective of this paper is to evaluate
associations between CNVs in differentially brain expressed (DBE) genes or genes 
previously implicated in ASD/intellectual disability (ASD/ID) and specific
sub-phenotypes of ASD. The sample consisted of 1590 cases of European ancestry
from the Autism Genome Project (AGP) with a diagnosis of an ASD and at least one 
rare CNV impacting any gene and a core set of phenotypic measures, including
symptom severity, language impairments, seizures, gait disturbances, intelligence
quotient (IQ) and adaptive function, as well as paternal and maternal age.
Classification analyses using a non-parametric recursive partitioning method
(random forests) were employed to define sets of phenotypic characteristics that 
best classify the CNV-defined groups. There was substantial variation in the
classification accuracy of the two sets of genes. The best variables for
classification were verbal IQ for the ASD/ID genes, paternal age at birth for the
DBE genes and adaptive function for de novo CNVs. CNVs in the ASD/ID list were
primarily associated with communication and language domains, whereas CNVs in DBE
genes were related to broader manifestations of adaptive function. To our
knowledge, this is the first study to examine the associations between
sub-phenotypes and CNVs genome-wide in ASD. This work highlights the importance
of examining the diverse sub-phenotypic manifestations of CNVs in ASD, including 
the specific features, comorbid conditions and clinical correlates of ASD that
comprise underlying characteristics of the disorder.Molecular Psychiatry advance 
online publication, 25 November 2014; doi:10.1038/mp.2014.150.

PMID: 25421404  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;20(1):140-7. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.145. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

The 16p11.2 locus modulates brain structures common to autism, schizophrenia and 
obesity.

Maillard AM(1), Ruef A(2), Pizzagalli F(3), Migliavacca E(4), Hippolyte L(1),
Adaszewski S(2), Dukart J(5), Ferrari C(6), Conus P(6), Mannik K(7), Zazhytska
M(7), Siffredi V(1), Maeder P(8), Kutalik Z(9), Kherif F(2), Hadjikhani N(10),
Beckmann JS(11), Reymond A(7), Draganski B(5), Jacquemont S(1); 16p11.2 European 
Consortium.

Collaborators: Addor MC, Andrieux J, Arveiler B, Baujat G, Bena F, Bonneau D,
Bouquillon S, Boute O, Brusco A, Campion D, David A, Delrue MA, Doco-Fenzy M,
Fagerberg C, Faivre L, Forzano F, Giachino D, Guichet A, Guillin O, Heron D,
Isidor B, Jacquette A, Journel H, Keren B, Le Caignec C, Lemaitre MP, Lespinasse 
J, Mathieu-Dramart M, Mignot C, Petit F, Plessis G, Prieur F, Rooryck C,
Sanlaville D, Van Haelst M, Van Maldergem L.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)LREN-Departement des
neurosciences cliniques, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University 
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)1] Service of Medical Genetics, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland [2] LREN-Departement des neurosciences cliniques, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (4)1]
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
[2] Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (5)1] LREN-Departement des neurosciences cliniques, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland [2] Department of Neurology, Max-Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Science, Leipzig, Germany. (6)Department of Psychiatry, CERY Hospital
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (7)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland. (8)Department of Radiology, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (9)1]
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 
[2] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
[3] Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine (IUMSP), Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (10)1]
Brain Mind Institute, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland [2] Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, Massachussetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
MA, USA [3] Gillberg Neuropsychiatry Centre, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (11)1] Service of Medical Genetics, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland [2] Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland [3] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Anatomical structures and mechanisms linking genes to neuropsychiatric disorders 
are not deciphered. Reciprocal copy number variants at the 16p11.2 BP4-BP5 locus 
offer a unique opportunity to study the intermediate phenotypes in carriers at
high risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or schizophrenia (SZ). We
investigated the variation in brain anatomy in 16p11.2 deletion and duplication
carriers. Beyond gene dosage effects on global brain metrics, we show that the
number of genomic copies negatively correlated to the gray matter volume and
white matter tissue properties in cortico-subcortical regions implicated in
reward, language and social cognition. Despite the near absence of ASD or SZ
diagnoses in our 16p11.2 cohort, the pattern of brain anatomy changes in carriers
spatially overlaps with the well-established structural abnormalities in ASD and 
SZ. Using measures of peripheral mRNA levels, we confirm our genomic copy number 
findings. This combined molecular, neuroimaging and clinical approach, applied to
larger datasets, will help interpret the relative contributions of genes to
neuropsychiatric conditions by measuring their effect on local brain anatomy.

PMCID: PMC4320286
PMID: 25421402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 24;5:5586. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6586.

Cerebellar plasticity and motor learning deficits in a copy-number variation
mouse model of autism.

Piochon C(1), Kloth AD(2), Grasselli G(1), Titley HK(1), Nakayama H(3), Hashimoto
K(3), Wan V(1), Simmons DH(1), Eissa T(1), Nakatani J(4), Cherskov A(2), Miyazaki
T(5), Watanabe M(5), Takumi T(6), Kano M(7), Wang SS(2), Hansel C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA. (2)1] Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New 
Jersey 08544, USA [2] Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. (3)Department of Neurophysiology, Graduate
School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima
734-8551, Japan. (4)Shiga University of Medical Science, Ohtsu 520-2192, Japan.
(5)Department of Anatomy, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (6)RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako 351-0198, Japan. 
(7)Department of Neurophysiology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A common feature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is the impairment of motor
control and learning, occurring in a majority of children with autism, consistent
with perturbation in cerebellar function. Here we report alterations in motor
behaviour and cerebellar synaptic plasticity in a mouse model (patDp/+) for the
human 15q11-13 duplication, one of the most frequently observed genetic
aberrations in autism. These mice show ASD-resembling social behaviour deficits. 
We find that in patDp/+ mice delay eyeblink conditioning--a form of
cerebellum-dependent motor learning--is impaired, and observe deregulation of a
putative cellular mechanism for motor learning, long-term depression (LTD) at
parallel fibre-Purkinje cell synapses. Moreover, developmental elimination of
surplus climbing fibres--a model for activity-dependent synaptic pruning--is
impaired. These findings point to deficits in synaptic plasticity and pruning as 
potential causes for motor problems and abnormal circuit development in autism.

PMCID: PMC4243533 [Available on 2015-05-24]
PMID: 25418414  [PubMed - in process]


7. Mol Autism. 2014 May 20;5:34. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-34. eCollection 2014.

The Autism Simplex Collection: an international, expertly phenotyped autism
sample for genetic and phenotypic analyses.

Buxbaum JD(1), Bolshakova N(2), Brownfeld JM(1), Anney RJ(2), Bender P(3),
Bernier R(4), Cook EH(5), Coon H(6), Cuccaro M(7), Freitag CM(8), Hallmayer J(9),
Geschwind D(10), Klauck SM(11), Nurnberger JI(12), Oliveira G(13), Pinto D(1),
Poustka F(8), Scherer SW(14), Shih A(15), Sutcliffe JS(16), Szatmari P(17),
Vicente AM(18), Vieland V(19), Gallagher L(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Department of Psychiatry,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York 10029, USA. (2)Autism Genetics 
Group, Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin 8,
Ireland. (3)National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), Bethesda, MD 20892-9663, 
USA. (4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (5)Institute for Juvenile Research,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60608,
USA. (6)Psychiatry Department, University of Utah Medical School, Salt Lake City,
UT 84108, USA. (7)The John P Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of 
Miami, Miami, FL 33101, USA. (8)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, JW Goethe University Frankfurt, 60528
Frankfurt, Germany. (9)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of California at Los Angeles, School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (11)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (12)Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (13)Unidade de
Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo do Servico do Centro de Desenvolvimento da Crianca
and Centro de Investigacao e Formacao Clinica, Pediatric Hospital, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitario de Coimbra, 3000-602 Coimbra, Portugal ; University
Clinic of Pediatrics and Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Science,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, 3000-602 Coimbra, Portugal.
(14)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Centre for Applied Genomics, Hospital
for Sick Children and McLaughlin Centre and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (15)Autism Speaks, New York, NY 10016, USA. (16)Department of Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt Kennedy Center, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA ; Centers for Human Genetics Research and Molecular
Neuroscience, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (17)Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8N
3Z5, Canada. (18)Instituto Nacional de Saude Dr Ricardo Jorge, 1649-016 Lisbon,
Portugal ; Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, P-2781-901 Oeiras, Portugal ;
BioFIG-Center for Biodiversity, Functional & Integrative Genomics, Campus da
FCUL, C2.2.12, Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal. (19)The Research
Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is an urgent need for expanding and enhancing autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) samples, in order to better understand causes of ASD.
METHODS: In a unique public-private partnership, 13 sites with extensive
experience in both the assessment and diagnosis of ASD embarked on an ambitious, 
2-year program to collect samples for genetic and phenotypic research and begin
analyses on these samples. The program was called The Autism Simplex Collection
(TASC). TASC sample collection began in 2008 and was completed in 2010, and
included nine sites from North America and four sites from Western Europe, as
well as a centralized Data Coordinating Center.
RESULTS: Over 1,700 trios are part of this collection, with DNA from transformed 
cells now available through the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH).
Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule-Generic (ADOS-G) measures are available for all probands, as are
standardized IQ measures, Vineland Adaptive Behavioral Scales (VABS), the Social 
Responsiveness Scale (SRS), Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), and physical 
measures (height, weight, and head circumference). At almost every site,
additional phenotypic measures were collected, including the Broad Autism
Phenotype Questionnaire (BAPQ) and Repetitive Behavior Scale-Revised (RBS-R), as 
well as the non-word repetition scale, Communication Checklist (Children's or
Adult), and Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC). Moreover, for nearly 1,000 trios, 
the Autism Genome Project Consortium (AGP) has carried out Illumina 1 M SNP
genotyping and called copy number variation (CNV) in the samples, with data being
made available through the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Whole exome
sequencing (WES) has been carried out in over 500 probands, together with
ancestry matched controls, and this data is also available through the NIH.
Additional WES is being carried out by the Autism Sequencing Consortium (ASC),
where the focus is on sequencing complete trios. ASC sequencing for the first
1,000 samples (all from whole-blood DNA) is complete and data will be released in
2014. Data is being made available through NIH databases (database of Genotypes
and Phenotypes (dbGaP) and National Database for Autism Research (NDAR)) with DNA
released in Dist 11.0. Primary funding for the collection, genotyping, sequencing
and distribution of TASC samples was provided by Autism Speaks and the NIH,
including the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and the National Human
Genetics Research Institute (NHGRI).
CONCLUSIONS: TASC represents an important sample set that leverages expert sites.
Similar approaches, leveraging expert sites and ongoing studies, represent an
important path towards further enhancing available ASD samples.

PMCID: PMC4228819
PMID: 25392729  [PubMed]


8. Mol Syndromol. 2014 Aug;5(5):229-35. doi: 10.1159/000362891. Epub 2014 May 17.

A candidate gene association study further corroborates involvement of contactin 
genes in autism.

Poot M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Although autism spectrum disorder (ASD) shows a high degree of heritability, only
a few mutated genes and mostly de novo copy number variations (CNVs) with a high 
phenotypic impact have as yet been identified. In families with multiple ASD
patients, transmitted CNVs often do not appear to cosegregate with disease.
Therefore, also transmitted single nucleotide variants which escape detection if 
genetic analyses were limited to CNVs may contribute to disease risk. In several 
studies of ASD patients, CNVs covering at least one gene of the contactin gene
family were found. To determine whether there is evidence for a contribution of
transmitted variants in contactin genes, a cohort of 67 ASD patients and a
population-based reference of 117 healthy individuals, who were not related to
the ASD families, were compared. In total, 1,648 SNPs, spanning 12.1 Mb of
genomic DNA, were examined. After Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, the
strongest signal was found for a SNP located within the CNTN5 gene (rs6590473
[G], p = 4.09 x 10(-7); OR = 3.117; 95% CI = 1.603-6.151). In the ASD cohort, a
combination of risk alleles of SNPs in CNTN6 (rs9878022 [A]; OR = 3.749) and in
CNTNAP2 (rs7804520 [G]; OR = 2.437) was found more frequently than would be
expected under random segregation, albeit this association was not statistically 
significant. The latter finding is consistent with a polygenic disease model in
which multiple mutagenic mechanisms, operating concomitantly, elicit the ASD
phenotype. Altogether, this study corroborates the possible involvement of
contactins in ASD, which has been indicated by earlier studies of CNVs.

PMCID: PMC4188154
PMID: 25337070  [PubMed]


9. Psychiatr Pol. 2014 Jul-Aug;48(4):689-700.

[Molecular aspects of autism spectrum disorders].

[Article in Polish]

Lisik MZ.

Autism, also known as autism spectrum disorders (ASD), is etiologically and
clinically heterogeneous group ofneurodevelopmental disabilities. ASD affects 1% 
of child's population. The sex difference is observed with 4:1 male to female
ratio. This is descriptive diagnosis based on observation and analysis of
behavior and cognitive functions. ASD does not fit the criteria of known patterns
of inheritance. For the majority of patients polygenic model of inheritance with 
many interacting genes is the most probable. The etiology ofASD is poorly
understood. It is estimated that a specific genetic etiology can be determined in
up to 20% of individuals with ASD. Advances in microarray technology and next
generation sequencing are revealing copy variant numbers (CNV) and single
nucleotides polymorphisms (SNP) with important roles in synapse formation and
function. For families where a specific etiology has been identified, the risk of
recurrence in siblings generally depends on the etiologic diagnosis. For autism
of unknown cause, the sibling risk varies across studies but is generally
considered to range from 5 to 10%.

PMID: 25314797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Oct 14. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.124. [Epub ahead of print]

Increased CYFIP1 dosage alters cellular and dendritic morphology and dysregulates
mTOR.

Oguro-Ando A(1), Rosensweig C(2), Herman E(2), Nishimura Y(2), Werling D(2), Bill
BR(2), Berg JM(2), Gao F(2), Coppola G(3), Abrahams BS(2), Geschwind DH(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, Center for Autism Research 
and Treatment, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Department of Translational
Neuroscience, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology,
Center for Autism Research and Treatment, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)1]
Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, Center for Autism Research and
Treatment, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Semel Institute, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
USA. (4)1] Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, Center for Autism
Research and Treatment, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Department of
Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Rare maternally inherited duplications at 15q11-13 are observed in ~1% of
individuals with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD), making it among the most
common causes of ASD. 15q11-13 comprises a complex region, and as this copy
number variation encompasses many genes, it is important to explore individual
genotype-phenotype relationships. Cytoplasmic FMR1-interacting protein 1 (CYFIP1)
is of particular interest because of its interaction with Fragile X mental
retardation protein (FMRP), its upregulation in transformed lymphoblastoid cell
lines from patients with duplications at 15q11-13 and ASD and the presence of
smaller overlapping deletions of CYFIP1 in patients with schizophrenia and
intellectual disability. Here, we confirm that CYFIP1 is upregulated in
transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines and demonstrate its upregulation in the
post-mortem brain from 15q11-13 duplication patients for the first time. To
investigate how increased CYFIP1 dosage might predispose to neurodevelopmental
disease, we studied the consequence of its overexpression in multiple systems. We
show that overexpression of CYFIP1 results in morphological abnormalities
including cellular hypertrophy in SY5Y cells and differentiated mouse neuronal
progenitors. We validate these results in vivo by generating a BAC transgenic
mouse, which overexpresses Cyfip1 under the endogenous promotor, observing an
increase in the proportion of mature dendritic spines and dendritic spine
density. Gene expression profiling on embryonic day 15 suggested the
dysregulation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling, which was
confirmed at the protein level. Importantly, similar evidence of mTOR-related
dysregulation was seen in brains from 15q11-13 duplication patients with ASD.
Finally, treatment of differentiated mouse neuronal progenitors with an mTOR
inhibitor (rapamycin) rescued the morphological abnormalities resulting from
CYFIP1 overexpression. Together, these data show that CYFIP1 overexpression
results in specific cellular phenotypes and implicate modulation by mTOR
signaling, further emphasizing its role as a potential convergent pathway in some
forms of ASD.Molecular Psychiatry advance online publication, 14 October 2014;
doi:10.1038/mp.2014.124.

PMID: 25311365  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;134(1):67-75. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1489-2. Epub 2014 Oct
7.

DUF1220 copy number is linearly associated with increased cognitive function as
measured by total IQ and mathematical aptitude scores.

Davis JM(1), Searles VB, Anderson N, Keeney J, Raznahan A, Horwood LJ, Fergusson 
DM, Kennedy MA, Giedd J, Sikela JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Human Medical Genetics, 
Medical Scientist Training and Neuroscience Programs, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Anschutz Medical Campus, RC1-S, L18-10125, 12801 East 17th
Ave, Mailstop 8101, P.O. Box 6511, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.

DUF1220 protein domains exhibit the greatest human lineage-specific copy number
expansion of any protein-coding sequence in the genome, and variation in DUF1220 
copy number has been linked to both brain size in humans and brain evolution
among primates. Given these findings, we examined associations between DUF1220
subtypes CON1 and CON2 and cognitive aptitude. We identified a linear association
between CON2 copy number and cognitive function in two independent populations of
European descent. In North American males, an increase in CON2 copy number
corresponded with an increase in WISC IQ (R (2) = 0.13, p = 0.02), which may be
driven by males aged 6-11 (R (2) = 0.42, p = 0.003). We utilized ddPCR in a
subset as a confirmatory measurement. This group had 26-33 copies of CON2 with a 
mean of 29, and each copy increase of CON2 was associated with a 3.3-point
increase in WISC IQ (R (2) = 0.22, p = 0.045). In individuals from New Zealand,
an increase in CON2 copy number was associated with an increase in math aptitude 
ability (R (2) = 0.10 p = 0.018). These were not confounded by brain size. To our
knowledge, this is the first study to report a replicated association between
copy number of a gene coding sequence and cognitive aptitude. Remarkably, dosage 
variations involving DUF1220 sequences have now been linked to human brain
expansion, autism severity and cognitive aptitude, suggesting that such processes
may be genetically and mechanistically inter-related. The findings presented here
warrant expanded investigations in larger, well-characterized cohorts.

PMID: 25287832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Nov;15(11):706. doi: 10.1038/nrg3840. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Disease genetics: Searching large and small.

Lau E.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1063-71.

PMID: 25266033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1046-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3106.

Reaching a CNV milestone.

Beaudet AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics at Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1063-71.

A new study compares the copy number variants (CNVs) in 29,085 children with
developmental delay to those in 19,584 healthy controls, providing a valuable
compilation of such data. The phenotypic variability and wide range of penetrance
for these variants present societal challenges regarding how these findings might
be incorporated into newborn screening, early intervention and, perhaps, carrier 
testing and prenatal diagnosis.

PMID: 25257083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Biol Sci. 2014 Nov 7;281(1794):20140604. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2014.0604.

Opposite risk patterns for autism and schizophrenia are associated with normal
variation in birth size: phenotypic support for hypothesized diametric
gene-dosage effects.

Byars SG(1), Stearns SC(2), Boomsma JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Social Evolution, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark sean.byars@unimelb.edu.au. (2)Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. (3)Centre for Social
Evolution, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
jjboomsma@bio.ku.dk.

Opposite phenotypic and behavioural traits associated with copy number variation 
and disruptions to imprinted genes with parent-of-origin effects have led to the 
hypothesis that autism and schizophrenia share molecular risk factors and
pathogenic mechanisms, but a direct phenotypic comparison of how their risks
covary has not been attempted. Here, we use health registry data collected on
Denmark's roughly 5 million residents between 1978 and 2009 to detect opposing
risks of autism and schizophrenia depending on normal variation (mean +- 1 s.d.)
in adjusted birth size, which we use as a proxy for diametric gene-dosage
variation in utero. Above-average-sized babies (weight, 3691-4090 g; length,
52.8-54.3 cm) had significantly higher risk for autism spectrum (AS) and
significantly lower risk for schizophrenia spectrum (SS) disorders. By contrast, 
below-average-sized babies (2891-3290 g; 49.7-51.2 cm) had significantly lower
risk for AS and significantly higher risk for SS disorders. This is the first
study directly comparing autism and schizophrenia risks in the same population,
and provides the first large-scale empirical support for the hypothesis that
diametric gene-dosage effects contribute to these disorders. Only the kinship
theory of genomic imprinting predicts the opposing risk patterns that we
discovered, suggesting that molecular research on mental disease risk would
benefit from considering evolutionary theory.

(c) 2014 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4211440 [Available on 2015-11-07]
PMID: 25232142  [PubMed - in process]


15. Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1063-71. doi: 10.1038/ng.3092. Epub 2014 Sep 14.

Refining analyses of copy number variation identifies specific genes associated
with developmental delay.

Coe BP(1), Witherspoon K(1), Rosenfeld JA(2), van Bon BW(3), Vulto-van Silfhout
AT(4), Bosco P(5), Friend KL(6), Baker C(1), Buono S(5), Vissers LE(4),
Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH(4), Hoischen A(4), Pfundt R(4), Krumm N(1), Carvill GL(7),
Li D(8), Amaral D(8), Brown N(9), Lockhart PJ(10), Scheffer IE(11), Alberti A(5),
Shaw M(6), Pettinato R(5), Tervo R(12), de Leeuw N(4), Reijnders MR(4), Torchia
BS(2), Peeters H(13), O'Roak BJ(14), Fichera M(15), Hehir-Kwa JY(4), Shendure
J(1), Mefford HC(7), Haan E(16), Gecz J(17), de Vries BB(4), Romano C(5), Eichler
EE(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (2)Signature Genomics Laboratories, LLC, PerkinElmer,
Inc., Spokane, Washington, USA. (3)1] Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. [2] SA Pathology, North
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (5)IRCCS (Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico) Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima,
Troina, Italy. (6)SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
(8)Representing the Autism Phenome Project, MIND Institute, University of
California, Davis, Sacramento, California, USA. (9)1] Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. [2] Barwon Child Health Unit, Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria,
Australia. (10)1] Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. [2] Murdoch Childrens
Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (11)Florey Institute, University of Melbourne,
Austin Health and Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(12)Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA. (13)1] Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. [2] Leuven Autism Research (LAuRes), Leuven, Belgium.
(14)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2]. (15)1] IRCCS (Istituto di Ricovero e
Cura a Carattere Scientifico) Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy. 
[2]. (16)1] SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. [2] School 
of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (17)1] SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. [2] Robinson Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (18)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2] Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Nov;15(11):706.
    Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1046-8.

Copy number variants (CNVs) are associated with many neurocognitive disorders;
however, these events are typically large, and the underlying causative genes are
unclear. We created an expanded CNV morbidity map from 29,085 children with
developmental delay in comparison to 19,584 healthy controls, identifying 70
significant CNVs. We resequenced 26 candidate genes in 4,716 additional cases
with developmental delay or autism and 2,193 controls. An integrated analysis of 
CNV and single-nucleotide variant (SNV) data pinpointed 10 genes enriched for
putative loss of function. Follow-up of a subset of affected individuals
identified new clinical subtypes of pediatric disease and the genes responsible
for disease-associated CNVs. These genetic changes include haploinsufficiency of 
SETBP1 associated with intellectual disability and loss of expressive language
and truncations of ZMYND11 in individuals with autism, aggression and complex
neuropsychiatric features. This combined CNV and SNV approach facilitates the
rapid discovery of new syndromes and genes involved in neuropsychiatric disease
despite extensive genetic heterogeneity.

PMCID: PMC4177294
PMID: 25217958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 19;452(2):244-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.108. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Genomic and genetic aspects of autism spectrum disorder.

Liu X(1), Takumi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (2)RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan; Japan Science and Technology
Agent (JST), Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST),
Saitama, Japan. Electronic address: toru.takumi@riken.jp.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong
genetic component. The past decade has witnessed tremendous progress in the
genetic studies of ASD. In this article, we review the accumulating literatures
on the monogenic forms of ASD and chromosomal abnormalities associated with ASD, 
the genome-wide linkage and association studies, the copy number variation (CNV) 
and the next generation sequencing (NGS) studies. With more than hundreds of
mutations being implicated, the convergent biological pathways are emerging and
the genetic landscape of ASD becomes clearer. The genetic studies provide a solid
basis for future translational study for better diagnoses, intervention and
treatment of ASD.

Copyright (c) 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2014;144(1):1-8. doi: 10.1159/000365909. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

A case with a ring chromosome 13 in a cohort of 203 children with non-syndromic
autism and review of the cytogenetic literature.

Charalsawadi C(1), Maisrikhaw W, Praphanphoj V, Wirojanan J, Hansakunachai T,
Roongpraiwan R, Sombuntham T, Ruangdaraganon N, Limprasert P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University,
Songkhla, Thailand.

Autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental disorders
characterized by impairments of social interaction, communication and restricted,
repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests and activities.
Frequencies of chromosomal abnormalities in cohorts of individuals with ASD
varying between 1.2 and 28.6% have been reported. In this study, we evaluated 203
Thai children who met the criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV), for autistic disorder or pervasive
developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS), and who had neither
major dysmorphic features nor CGG repeat expansions of the FMR1 gene. A routine
G-banding chromosome analysis was performed at a minimum of ISCN 400-550 bands. A
chromosomal abnormality was observed in one child (0.5%), a 41-month-old boy with
a ring chromosome 13 detected by G-banding analysis and subsequently confirmed by
FISH. SNP microarray analysis detected a 2.11-Mb deletion of chromosome 13q34,
encompassing 23 genes. The MCF2L and UPF3A genes are among those genes that may
explain the autistic features in our case. To the best of our knowledge, only one
autistic case with a ring chromosome 13 has been previously reported. In this
article, we also systemically reviewed 21 studies that utilized a conventional
cytogenetic method to detect chromosomal abnormalities in patients with ASD. When
we summed all cases with chromosomal abnormalities, including the case from our
study, the frequency of chromosomal abnormalities detected by conventional
cytogenetics in patients with ASD was 3.2% (118/3,712).

(c) 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25171325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Neurodev Disord. 2014;6(1):34. doi: 10.1186/1866-1955-6-34. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

Copy number variation in Han Chinese individuals with autism spectrum disorder.

Gazzellone MJ(1), Zhou X(2), Lionel AC(1), Uddin M(3), Thiruvahindrapuram B(3),
Liang S(4), Sun C(4), Wang J(4), Zou M(4), Tammimies K(5), Walker S(3),
Selvanayagam T(3), Wei J(3), Wang Z(3), Wu L(4), Scherer SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology,
The Hospital for Sick Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research 
and Learning, Room 139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada ; Department of
Molecular Genetics and McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto Ontario 
M5S 1A1, Canada. (2)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and
Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan
Centre for Research and Learning, Room 139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada ;
Department of Children's and Adolescent Health, Public Health College of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, People's Republic of China ;
Heilongjiang Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150030, People's Republic of China. (3)The Centre for Applied
Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, Room
139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada. (4)Department of Children's and
Adolescent Health, Public Health College of Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150086, People's Republic of China. (5)The Centre for Applied
Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 686 Bay Street, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, Room
139800, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada ; Center of Neurodevelopmental
Disorders, Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm 113 30, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of neurodevelopmental
conditions with a demonstrated genetic etiology. Rare (<1% frequency) copy number
variations (CNVs) account for a proportion of the genetic events involved, but
the contribution of these events in non-European ASD populations has not been
well studied. Here, we report on rare CNVs detected in a cohort of individuals
with ASD of Han Chinese background.
METHODS: DNA samples were obtained from 104 ASD probands and their parents who
were recruited from Harbin, China. Samples were genotyped on the Affymetrix
CytoScan HD platform. Rare CNVs were identified by comparing data with 873
technology-matched controls from Ontario and 1,235 additional population controls
of Han Chinese ethnicity.
RESULTS: Of the probands, 8.6% had at least 1 de novo CNV (overlapping the
GIGYF2, SPRY1, 16p13.3, 16p11.2, 17p13.3-17p13.2, DMD, and NAP1L6 genes/loci).
Rare inherited CNVs affected other plausible neurodevelopmental candidate genes
including GRID2, LINGO2, and SLC39A12. A 24-kb duplication was also identified at
YWHAE, a gene previously implicated in ASD and other developmental disorders.
This duplication is observed at a similar frequency in cases and in population
controls and is likely a benign Asian-specific copy number polymorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings help define genomic features relevant to ASD in the Han
Chinese and emphasize the importance of using ancestry-matched controls in
medical genetic interpretations.

PMCID: PMC4147384
PMID: 25170348  [PubMed]


19. Curr Genet Med Rep. 2014 Jul 18;2:146-150. eCollection 2014.

Genomic Variation: Lessons Learned from Whole-Genome CNV Analysis.

Riggs ER(1), Ledbetter DH(2), Martin CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, 120 Hamm
Drive, Suite 2A, Lewisburg, PA 17837 USA. (2)Geisinger Health System, 100 N
Academy Ave., Danville, PA 17822 USA.

One of the most fundamental goals of the study of human genetics was to determine
the relationship between genomic variation and human disease. The effects of
large-scale structural variation, such as aneuploidy and other cytogenetically
visible imbalances, as well as sequence-level variation, have been studied for
several decades. However, compared to these, the impact of submicroscopic copy
number variants (CNV) has only recently been appreciated. Despite this, lessons
learned from the study of CNVs have already proven significant and broadly
applicable. From expanding the concept of normal human variation to providing
concrete examples of the utility of genomics in clinical care and challenging
notions of the genetic architecture of complex disease, CNVs have provided
valuable insights into the genomics of human health and development.

PMCID: PMC4129219
PMID: 25152847  [PubMed]


20. J Neurosci. 2014 Aug 20;34(34):11199-211. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1366-14.2014.

Opposing brain differences in 16p11.2 deletion and duplication carriers.

Qureshi AY(1), Mueller S(2), Snyder AZ(3), Mukherjee P(4), Berman JI(5), Roberts 
TP(5), Nagarajan SS(4), Spiro JE(6), Chung WK(7), Sherr EH(8), Buckner RL(9);
Simons VIP Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University, Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, Departments of Neurology and. (2)Athinoula A.
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, Ludwig Maximilians University
Munich, Institute of Clinical Radiology, Munich 81377, Germany. (3)Departments of
Neurology and Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis, St
Louis, Missouri 63110. (4)Departments of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, and.
(5)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104. (6)Simons Foundation, New York, New York 10010, and.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York 10032. (8)Neurology, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94158. (9)Harvard University, Department of Psychology and Center for 
Brain Science, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, Psychiatry, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, randy_buckner@harvard.edu.

Deletions and duplications of the recurrent ~600 kb chromosomal BP4-BP5 region of
16p11.2 are associated with a broad variety of neurodevelopmental outcomes
including autism spectrum disorder. A clue to the pathogenesis of the copy number
variant (CNV)'s effect on the brain is that the deletion is associated with a
head size increase, whereas the duplication is associated with a decrease. Here
we analyzed brain structure in a clinically ascertained group of human deletion
(N = 25) and duplication (N = 17) carriers from the Simons Variation in
Individuals Project compared with age-matched controls (N = 29 and 33,
respectively). Multiple brain measures showed increased size in deletion carriers
and reduced size in duplication carriers. The effects spanned global measures of 
intracranial volume, brain size, compartmental measures of gray matter and white 
matter, subcortical structures, and the cerebellum. Quantitatively, the largest
effect was on the thalamus, but the collective results suggest a pervasive rather
than a selective effect on the brain. Detailed analysis of cortical gray matter
revealed that cortical surface area displays a strong dose-dependent effect of
CNV (deletion > control > duplication), whereas average cortical thickness is
less affected. These results suggest that the CNV may exert its opposing
influences through mechanisms that influence early stages of embryonic brain
development.

Copyright (c) 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3411199-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4138332
PMID: 25143601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2014;115:203-44. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801311-3.00006-8.

Epigenetic mechanisms in autism spectrum disorder.

Zhubi A(1), Cook EH(2), Guidotti A(1), Grayson DR(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Psychiatric Institute, Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (2)Institute for Juvenile Research, Department
of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (3)The 
Psychiatric Institute, Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. Electronic address: dgrayson@psych.uic.edu.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by
impaired social interactions, language deficits, as well as restrictive or
repetitive behaviors. ASD is clinically heterogeneous with a complex
etiopathogenesis which may be conceptualized as a dynamic interplay between
heterogeneous environmental cues and predisposing genetic factors involving
complex epigenetic mechanisms. Inherited and de novo copy number variants provide
novel information regarding genes contributing to ASD. Epigenetic marks are
stable, yet potentially reversible, chromatin modifications that alter gene
expression profiles by locally changing the degree of nucleosomal compaction,
thereby opening or closing promoter access to the transcriptional machinery.
Here, we review progress on studies designed to provide a better understanding of
how epigenetic mechanisms impact transcriptional programs operative in the brain 
that contribute to ASD.

(c) 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25131546  [PubMed - in process]


22. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 Aug;53(8):910-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2014.04.022. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Copy number variation in obsessive-compulsive disorder and tourette syndrome: a
cross-disorder study.

McGrath LM, Yu D, Marshall C, Davis LK, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Li B, Cappi C,
Gerber G, Wolf A, Schroeder FA, Osiecki L, O'Dushlaine C, Kirby A, Illmann C,
Haddad S, Gallagher P, Fagerness JA, Barr CL, Bellodi L, Benarroch F, Bienvenu
OJ, Black DW, Bloch MH, Bruun RD, Budman CL, Camarena B, Cath DC, Cavallini MC,
Chouinard S, Coric V, Cullen B, Delorme R, Denys D, Derks EM, Dion Y, Rosario MC,
Eapen V, Evans P, Falkai P, Fernandez TV, Garrido H, Geller D, Grabe HJ, Grados
MA, Greenberg BD, Gross-Tsur V, Grunblatt E, Heiman GA, Hemmings SM, Herrera LD, 
Hounie AG, Jankovic J, Kennedy JL, King RA, Kurlan R, Lanzagorta N, Leboyer M,
Leckman JF, Lennertz L, Lochner C, Lowe TL, Lyon GJ, Macciardi F, Maier W,
McCracken JT, McMahon W, Murphy DL, Naarden AL, Neale BM, Nurmi E, Pakstis AJ,
Pato MT, Pato CN, Piacentini J, Pittenger C, Pollak Y, Reus VI, Richter MA,
Riddle M, Robertson MM, Rosenberg D, Rouleau GA, Ruhrmann S, Sampaio AS, Samuels 
J, Sandor P, Sheppard B, Singer HS, Smit JH, Stein DJ, Tischfield JA, Vallada H, 
Veenstra-VanderWeele J, Walitza S, Wang Y, Wendland JR, Shugart YY, Miguel EC,
Nicolini H, Oostra BA, Moessner R, Wagner M, Ruiz-Linares A, Heutink P, Nestadt
G, Freimer N, Petryshen T, Posthuma D, Jenike MA, Cox NJ, Hanna GL, Brentani H,
Scherer SW, Arnold PD, Stewart SE, Mathews CA, Knowles JA, Cook EH, Pauls DL,
Wang K, Scharf JM.

OBJECTIVE: Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and Tourette syndrome (TS) are
heritable neurodevelopmental disorders with a partially shared genetic etiology. 
This study represents the first genome-wide investigation of large (>500 kb),
rare (<1%) copy number variants (CNVs) in OCD and the largest genome-wide CNV
analysis in TS to date.
METHOD: The primary analyses used a cross-disorder design for 2,699 case patients
(1,613 ascertained for OCD, 1,086 ascertained for TS) and 1,789 controls.
Parental data facilitated a de novo analysis in 348 OCD trios.
RESULTS: Although no global CNV burden was detected in the cross-disorder
analysis or in secondary, disease-specific analyses, there was a 3.3-fold
increased burden of large deletions previously associated with other
neurodevelopmental disorders (p = .09). Half of these neurodevelopmental
deletions were located in a single locus, 16p13.11 (5 case patient deletions: 0
control deletions, p = .08 in the current study, p = .025 compared to published
controls). Three 16p13.11 deletions were confirmed de novo, providing further
support for the etiological significance of this region. The overall OCD de novo 
rate was 1.4%, which is intermediate between published rates in controls (0.7%)
and in individuals with autism or schizophrenia (2-4%).
CONCLUSION: Several converging lines of evidence implicate 16p13.11 deletions in 
OCD, with weaker evidence for a role in TS. The trend toward increased overall
neurodevelopmental CNV burden in TS and OCD suggests that deletions previously
associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders may also contribute to these
phenotypes.

Copyright (c) 2014 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. All rights 
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4218748 [Available on 2015-08-01]
PMID: 25062598  [PubMed - in process]


23. J Neurodev Disord. 2014;6(1):17. doi: 10.1186/1866-1955-6-17. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

A CTNNA3 compound heterozygous deletion implicates a role for aT-catenin in
susceptibility to autism spectrum disorder.

Bacchelli E(1), Ceroni F(1), Pinto D(2), Lomartire S(1), Giannandrea M(3),
D'Adamo P(4), Bonora E(5), Parchi P(6), Tancredi R(7), Battaglia A(7), Maestrini 
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, via Selmi 3, 
Bologna 40126, Italy. (2)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA ; Department of
Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA ;
Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA ; The Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(3)Dulbecco Telethon Institute at San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Division of 
Neuroscience, Milan 20132, Italy. (4)Dulbecco Telethon Institute at San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Division of Neuroscience, Milan 20132, Italy ; Vita-Salute 
San Raffaele University, Milan 20132, Italy. (5)Unit of Medical Genetics,
Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital,
University of Bologna, Bologna 40138, Italy. (6)IRCCS Institute of Neurological
Sciences, Bologna 40139, Italy ; Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor
Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna 40139, Italy. (7)Stella Maris Clinical
Research Institute for Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, Calambrone, Pisa
56128, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable,
neurodevelopmental condition showing extreme genetic heterogeneity. While it is
well established that rare genetic variation, both de novo and inherited, plays
an important role in ASD risk, recent studies also support a rare recessive
contribution.
METHODS: We identified a compound heterozygous deletion intersecting the CTNNA3
gene, encoding aT-catenin, in a proband with ASD and moderate intellectual
disability. The deletion breakpoints were mapped at base-pair resolution, and
segregation analysis was performed. We compared the frequency of CTNNA3 exonic
deletions in 2,147 ASD cases from the Autism Genome Project (AGP) study versus
the frequency in 6,639 controls. Western blot analysis was performed to get a
quantitative characterisation of Ctnna3 expression during early brain development
in mouse.
RESULTS: The CTNNA3 compound heterozygous deletion includes a coding exon,
leading to a putative frameshift and premature stop codon. Segregation analysis
in the family showed that the unaffected sister is heterozygote for the deletion,
having only inherited the paternal deletion. While the frequency of CTNNA3 exonic
deletions is not significantly different between ASD cases and controls, no
homozygous or compound heterozygous exonic deletions were found in a sample of
over 6,000 controls. Expression analysis of Ctnna3 in the mouse cortex and
hippocampus (P0-P90) provided support for its role in the early stage of brain
development.
CONCLUSION: The finding of a rare compound heterozygous CTNNA3 exonic deletion
segregating with ASD, the absence of CTNNA3 homozygous exonic deletions in
controls and the high expression of Ctnna3 in both brain areas analysed implicate
CTNNA3 in ASD susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4104741
PMID: 25050139  [PubMed]


24. Ann Neurol. 2014 Oct;76(4):581-93. doi: 10.1002/ana.24225. Epub 2014 Sep 19.

Genetic and phenotypic diversity of NHE6 mutations in Christianson syndrome.

Pescosolido MF(1), Stein DM, Schmidt M, El Achkar CM, Sabbagh M, Rogg JM,
Tantravahi U, McLean RL, Liu JS, Poduri A, Morrow EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry and Laboratory
for Molecular Medicine, Institute for Brain Science, Brown University,
Providence, RI; Developmental Disorders Genetics Research Program, Emma Pendleton
Bradley Hospital and Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Warren Alpert
Medical School of Brown University, East Providence, RI.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, Christianson syndrome (CS) has been determined to be caused 
by mutations in the X-linked Na(+) /H(+) exchanger 6 (NHE6). We aimed to
determine the diagnostic criteria and mutational spectrum for CS.
METHODS: Twelve independent pedigrees (14 boys, age = 4-19 years) with mutations 
in NHE6 were administered standardized research assessments, and mutations were
characterized.
RESULTS: The mutational spectrum was composed of 9 single nucleotide variants, 2 
indels, and 1 copy number variation deletion. All mutations were
protein-truncating or splicing mutations. We identified 2 recurrent mutations
(c.1498 c>t, p.R500X; and c.1710 g>a, p.W570X). Otherwise, all mutations were
unique. In our study, 7 of 12 mutations (58%) were de novo, in contrast to prior 
literature wherein mutations were largely inherited. We also report prominent
neurological, medical, and behavioral symptoms. All CS participants were
nonverbal and had intellectual disability, epilepsy, and ataxia. Many had prior
diagnoses of autism and/or Angelman syndrome. Other neurologic symptoms included 
eye movement abnormalities (79%), postnatal microcephaly (92%), and magnetic
resonance imaging evidence of cerebellar atrophy (33%). Regression was noted in
50%, with recurrent presentations involving loss of words and/or the ability to
walk. Medical symptoms, particularly gastrointestinal symptoms, were common.
Height and body mass index measures were below normal ranges in most
participants. Behavioral symptoms included hyperkinetic behavior (100%), and a
majority exhibited high pain threshold.
INTERPRETATION: This is the largest cohort of independent CS pedigrees reported. 
We propose diagnostic criteria for CS. CS represents a novel neurogenetic
disorder with general relevance to autism, intellectual disability, Angelman
syndrome, epilepsy, and regression.

(c) 2014 American Neurological Association.

PMCID: PMC4304796 [Available on 2015-10-01]
PMID: 25044251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Case Rep Genet. 2014;2014:264947. doi: 10.1155/2014/264947. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Clinical report of a 17q12 microdeletion with additionally unreported clinical
features.

Roberts JL(1), Gandomi SK(2), Parra M(2), Lu I(2), Gau CL(2), Dasouki M(3),
Butler MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (2)Ambry 
Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA 92656, USA. (3)The University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA ; King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh 12713, Saudi Arabia.

Copy number variations involving the 17q12 region have been associated with
developmental and speech delay, autism, aggression, self-injury, biting and
hitting, oppositional defiance, inappropriate language, and auditory
hallucinations. We present a tall-appearing 17-year-old boy with marfanoid
habitus, hypermobile joints, mild scoliosis, pectus deformity, widely spaced
nipples, pes cavus, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability, and
psychiatric manifestations including physical and verbal aggression,
obsessive-compulsive behaviors, and oppositional defiance. An echocardiogram
showed borderline increased aortic root size. An abdominal ultrasound revealed a 
small pancreas, mild splenomegaly with a 1.3 cm accessory splenule, and normal
kidneys and liver. A testing panel for Marfan, aneurysm, and related disorders
was negative. Subsequently, a 400 K array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) + SNP analysis was performed which identified a de novo suspected
pathogenic deletion on chromosome 17q12 encompassing 28 genes. Despite the
limited number of cases described in the literature with 17q12 rearrangements,
our proband's phenotypic features both overlap and expand on previously reported 
cases. Since syndrome-specific DNA sequencing studies failed to provide an
explanation for this patient's unusual habitus, we postulate that this case
represents an expansion of the 17q12 microdeletion phenotype. Further analysis of
the deleted interval is recommended for new genotype-phenotype correlations.

PMCID: PMC4060289
PMID: 24991439  [PubMed]


26. J Formos Med Assoc. 2014 Jul;113(7):400-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2013.01.005. Epub 
2013 Mar 13.

Copy number variation and autism: new insights and clinical implications.

Chung BH(1), Tao VQ(2), Tso WW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka 
Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Tsan Yuk
Hospital, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region; Centre of Reproduction, Development and Growth, Li
Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region. Electronic address: bhychung@hku.hk. (2)Department of
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

Genomic research can lead to discoveries of copy number variations (CNVs) which
can be a susceptibility factor for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The clinical
translation is that this can improve the care of children with ASD. Chromosome
microarray is now the first-tiered genetic investigation for ASD, with a
detection rate exceeding conventional cytogenetics and any single gene testing.
However, interpretation of the results is challenging and there is no consensus
on "what" and "how much" to disclose. In this article, we will review how CNV
studies have improved our understanding of ASD, the clinical applications, and
related counseling issues. Future direction of autism genetic research is also
discussed.

Copyright (c) 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24961180  [PubMed - in process]


27. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Jun 5;94(6):870-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.05.004.

Transcriptional consequences of 16p11.2 deletion and duplication in mouse cortex 
and multiplex autism families.

Blumenthal I(1), Ragavendran A(1), Erdin S(1), Klei L(2), Sugathan A(1), Guide
JR(1), Manavalan P(1), Zhou JQ(3), Wheeler VC(1), Levin JZ(4), Ernst C(5), Roeder
K(3), Devlin B(2), Gusella JF(6), Talkowski ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics
Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (3)Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (4)Program in Medical and Population
Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Douglas Hospital Research
Institute, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, Canada. (6)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and
Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Program in
Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA 02141, USA; Departments of Neurology, Genetics, Psychiatry, and Pathology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02141, USA.
(7)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics
Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA; Departments of Neurology, Genetics,
Psychiatry, and Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02141, USA. Electronic address:
talkowski@chgr.mgh.harvard.edu.

Reciprocal copy-number variation (CNV) of a 593 kb region of 16p11.2 is a common 
genetic cause of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), yet it is not completely
penetrant and can manifest in a wide array of phenotypes. To explore its
molecular consequences, we performed RNA sequencing of cerebral cortex from mouse
models with CNV of the syntenic 7qF3 region and lymphoblast lines from 34 members
of 7 multiplex ASD-affected families harboring the 16p11.2 CNV. Expression of all
genes in the CNV region correlated well with their DNA copy number, with no
evidence of dosage compensation. We observed effects on gene expression outside
the CNV region, including apparent positional effects in cis and in trans at
genomic segments with evidence of physical interaction in Hi-C chromosome
conformation data. One of the most significant positional effects was telomeric
to the 16p11.2 CNV and includes the previously described "distal" 16p11.2
microdeletion. Overall, 16p11.2 CNV was associated with altered expression of
genes and networks that converge on multiple hypotheses of ASD pathogenesis,
including synaptic function (e.g., NRXN1, NRXN3), chromatin modification (e.g.,
CHD8, EHMT1, MECP2), transcriptional regulation (e.g., TCF4, SATB2), and
intellectual disability (e.g., FMR1, CEP290). However, there were differences
between tissues and species, with the strongest effects being consistently within
the CNV region itself. Our analyses suggest that through a combination of
indirect regulatory effects and direct effects on nuclear architecture,
alteration of 16p11.2 genes disrupts expression networks that involve other genes
and pathways known to contribute to ASD, suggesting an overlap in mechanisms of
pathogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4121471
PMID: 24906019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. BMC Med Genet. 2014 May 29;15:62. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-15-62.

A genomic copy number variant analysis implicates the MBD5 and HNRNPU genes in
Chinese children with infantile spasms and expands the clinical spectrum of
2q23.1 deletion.

Du X, An Y, Yu L, Liu R, Qin Y, Guo X, Sun D, Zhou S, Wu B, Jiang YH(1), Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 399 Wan Yuan
Road, Shanghai 201102, China. yong-hui.jiang@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Infantile spasms (IS) is a specific type of epileptic encephalopathy 
associated with severe developmental disabilities. Genetic factors are strongly
implicated in IS, however, the exact genetic defects remain unknown in the
majority of cases. Rare mutations in a single gene or in copy number variants
(CNVs) have been implicated in IS of children in Western countries. The objective
of this study was to dissect the role of copy number variations in Chinese
children with infantile spasms.
METHODS: We used the Agilent Human Genome CGH microarray 180 K for genome-wide
detection of CNVs. Real-time qPCR was used to validate the CNVs. We performed
genomic and medical annotations for individual CNVs to determine the
pathogenicity of CNVs related to IS.
RESULTS: We report herein the first genome-wide CNV analysis in children with IS,
detecting a total of 14 CNVs in a cohort of 47 Chinese children with IS. Four
CNVs (4/47 = 8.5%) (1q21.1 gain; 1q44, 2q31.1, and 17p13 loss) are considered to 
be pathogenic. The CNV loss at 17p13.3 contains PAFAH1B1 (LIS1), a causative gene
for lissencephaly. Although the CNVs at 1q21.1, 1q44, and 2q23.1 have been
previously implicated in a wide spectrum of clinical features including autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) and generalized seizure, our study is the first report
identifying them in individuals with a primary diagnosis of IS. The CNV loss in
the 1q44 region contains HNRNPU, a strong candidate gene recently suggested in IS
by the whole exome sequencing of children with IS. The CNV loss at 2q23.1
includes MBD5, a methyl-DNA binding protein that is a causative gene of ASD and a
candidate gene for epileptic encephalopathy. We also report a distinct clinical
presentation of IS, microcephaly, intellectual disability, and absent hallux in a
case with the 2q23.1 deletion.
CONCLUSION: Our findings strongly support the role of CNVs in infantile spasms
and expand the clinical spectrum associate with 2q23.1 deletion. In particular,
our study implicates the HNRNPU and MBD5 genes in Chinese children with IS. Our
study also supports that the molecular mechanisms of infantile spasms appear
conserved among different ethnic backgrounds.

PMCID: PMC4061518
PMID: 24885232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2014 Oct;51(5):249-62. doi: 10.3109/10408363.2014.910747. 
Epub 2014 May 30.

Genetic diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders: the opportunity and challenge in 
the genomics era.

Jiang YH(1), Wang Y, Xiu X, Choy KW, Pursley AN, Cheung SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine 
, Durham, NC , USA .

A genetic etiology for autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) was first suggested from 
twin studies reported in the 1970s. The identification of gene mutations in
syndromic ASDs provided evidence to support a genetic cause of ASDs. More
recently, genome-wide copy number variant and sequence analyses have uncovered a 
list of rare and highly penetrant copy number variants (CNVs) or single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) associated with ASDs, which has strengthened the claim
of a genetic etiology for ASDs. Findings from research studies in the genetics of
ASD now support an important role for molecular diagnostics in the clinical
genetics evaluation of ASDs. Various molecular diagnostic assays including single
gene tests, targeted multiple gene panels and copy number analysis should all be 
considered in the clinical genetics evaluation of ASDs. Whole exome sequencing
could also be considered in selected clinical cases. However, the challenge that 
remains is to determine the causal role of genetic variants identified through
molecular testing. Variable expressivity, pleiotropic effects and incomplete
penetrance associated with CNVs and SNVs also present significant challenges for 
genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis.

PMID: 24878448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1168:117-55. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0847-9_8.

Chromosome microarrays in diagnostic testing: interpreting the genomic data.

Peters GB(1), Pertile MD.

Author information: 
(1)Sydney Genome Diagnostics, The Childrens Hospital at Westmead, Cnr Hawkesbury 
Road and Hainsworth Street, Westmead, NSW, 2145, Australia,
greg.peters@health.nsw.gov.au.

DNA-based Chromosome MicroArrays (CMAs) are now well established as diagnostic
tools in clinical genetics laboratories. Over the last decade, the primary
application of CMAs has been the genome-wide detection of a particular class of
mutation known as copy number variants (CNVs). Since 2010, CMA testing has been
recommended as a first-tier test for detection of CNVs associated with
intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and/or multiple congenital
anomalies...in the post-natal setting. CNVs are now regarded as pathogenic in 14-18
% of patients referred for these (and related) disorders.Through consideration of
clinical examples, and several microarray platforms, we attempt to provide an
appreciation of microarray diagnostics, from the initial inspection of the
microarray data, to the composing of the patient report. In CMA data
interpretation, a major challenge comes from the high frequency of clinically
irrelevant CNVs observed within "patient" and "normal" populations. As might be
predicted, the more common and clinically insignificant CNVs tend to be the
smaller ones <100 kb in length, involving few or no known genes. However, this
relationship is not at all straightforward: CNV length and gene content are only 
very imperfect indicators of CNV pathogenicity. Presently, there are no reliable 
means of separating, a priori, the benign from the pathological CNV classes.This 
chapter also considers sources of technical "noise" within CMA data sets. Some
level of noise is inevitable in diagnostic genomics, given the very large number 
of data points generated in any one test. Noise further limits CMA resolution,
and some miscalling of CNVs is unavoidable. In this, there is no ideal solution, 
but various strategies for handling noise are available. Even without solutions, 
consideration of these diagnostic problems per se is informative, as they afford 
critical insights into the biological and technical underpinnings of CNV
discovery. These are indispensable to any clinician or scientist practising
within the field of genome diagnostics.

PMID: 24870134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2014 Sep;39(5):294-303.

Zinc finger protein 804A (ZNF804A) and verbal deficits in individuals with
autism.

Anitha A(1), Thanseem I(2), Nakamura K(3), Vasu MM(2), Yamada K(4), Ueki T(5),
Iwayama Y(4), Toyota T(4), Tsuchiya KJ(1), Iwata Y(2), Suzuki K(2), Sugiyama
T(6), Tsujii M(7), Yoshikawa T(4), Mori N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Child Mental Development, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Hirosaki
University School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. (4)Laboratory for Molecular
Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Japan. (5)Department of Anatomy,
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan. (6)Department of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu,
Japan. (7)Research Center for Child Mental Development, Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan; Faculty of Sociology, Chukyo University,
Toyota, Japan. (8)Research Center for Child Mental Development, Hamamatsu
University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan; Department of Psychiatry,
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In a genome-wide association study of autism, zinc finger protein
804A (ZNF804A) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were found to be nominally 
associated in verbally deficient individuals with autism. Zinc finger protein
804A copy number variations (CNVs) have also been observed in individuals with
autism. In addition, ZNF804A is known to be involved in theory of mind (ToM)
tasks, and ToM deficits are deemed responsible for the communication and social
challenges faced by individuals with autism. We hypothesized that ZNF804A could
be a risk gene for autism.
METHODS: We examined the genetic association and CNVs of ZNF804A in 841 families 
in which 1 or more members had autism. We compared the expression of ZNF804A in
the postmortem brains of individuals with autism (n = 8) and controls (n = 13).
We also assessed in vitro the effect of ZNF804A silencing on the expression of
several genes known to be involved in verbal efficiency and social cognition.
RESULTS: We found that rs7603001 was nominally associated with autism (p =
0.018). The association was stronger (p = 0.008) in the families of individuals
with autism who were verbally deficient (n = 761 families). We observed ZNF804A
CNVs in 7 verbally deficient boys with autism. In ZNF804A knockdown cells, the
expression of synaptosomal-associated protein, 25kDa (SNAP25) was reduced
compared with controls (p = 0.009). The expression of ZNF804A (p = 0.009) and
SNAP25 (p = 0.009) were reduced in the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG) of
individuals with autism. There was a strong positive correlation between the
expression of ZNF804A and SNAP25 in the ACG (p < 0.001).
LIMITATIONS: Study limitations include our small sample size of postmortem
brains.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that ZNF804A could be a potential candidate gene 
mediating the intermediate phenotypes associated with verbal traits in
individuals with autism.

PMCID: PMC4160358
PMID: 24866414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Jun;17(6):764-72. doi: 10.1038/nn.3703. Epub 2014 May 27.

Prioritization of neurodevelopmental disease genes by discovery of new mutations.

Hoischen A(1), Krumm N(2), Eichler EE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Medical Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. (3)1]
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

Advances in genome sequencing technologies have begun to revolutionize
neurogenetics, allowing the full spectrum of genetic variation to be better
understood in relation to disease. Exome sequencing of hundreds to thousands of
samples from patients with autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability,
epilepsy and schizophrenia provides strong evidence of the importance of de novo 
and gene-disruptive events. There are now several hundred new candidate genes and
targeted resequencing technologies that allow screening of dozens of genes in
tens of thousands of individuals with high specificity and sensitivity. The
decision of which genes to pursue depends on many factors, including recurrence, 
previous evidence of overlap with pathogenic copy number variants, the position
of the mutation in the protein, the mutational burden among healthy individuals
and membership of the candidate gene in disease-implicated protein networks. We
discuss these emerging criteria for gene prioritization and the potential impact 
on the field of neuroscience.

PMCID: PMC4077789 [Available on 2015-06-01]
PMID: 24866042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Fertil Steril. 2014 Aug;102(2):388-93. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.04.020.
Epub 2014 May 17.

No increase in autism-associated genetic events in children conceived by assisted
reproduction.

Ackerman S(1), Wenegrat J(2), Rettew D(3), Althoff R(3), Bernier R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Vermont,
Burlington, Vermont. Electronic address: sean.ackerman@vtmednet.org.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. (3)Department of Psychiatry,
School of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont.

OBJECTIVE: To understand the rate of genetic events in patients with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) who were exposed to assisted reproduction.
DESIGN: Case control study using genetics data.
SETTING: Twelve collaborating data collection sites across North America as part 
of the Simons Simplex Collection.
PATIENT(S): 2,760 children with ASD, for whom 1,994 had published copy number
variation data and 424 had published gene mutation status available.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Rates of autism-associated genetic events in children
with ASD conceived with assisted reproduction versus those conceived naturally.
RESULT(S): No statistically significant differences in copy number variations or 
autism-associated gene-disrupting events were found when comparing ASD patients
exposed to assisted reproduction with those not exposed to assisted reproduction.
CONCLUSION(S): This is the first large genetic association to concurrently
examine the genotype of individuals with ASD in relation to their exposure to ART
versus natural conception, and it adds reassuring evidence to the argument that
ART does not increase the risk of ASD.

Copyright (c) 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24842673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Aug;40(4):2680-90. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12618. Epub 2014 May 20.

Deletion of TRIM32 protects mice from anxiety- and depression-like behaviors
under mild stress.

Ruan CS(1), Wang SF, Shen YJ, Guo Y, Yang CR, Zhou FH, Tan LT, Zhou L, Liu JJ,
Wang WY, Xiao ZC, Zhou XF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Molecular 
and Clinical Medicine, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China; Division of
Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, University of South
Australia, Adelaide, SA, 5000, Australia.

Chronic stress causes a variety of psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and
depression, but its mechanism is not well understood. Tripartite motif-containing
protein 32 (TRIM32) was strongly associated with autism spectrum disorder,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, anxiety and obsessive compulsive
disorder based on a study of copy number variation, and deletion of TRIM32
increased neural proliferation and reduced apoptosis. Here, we propose that
TRIM32 is involved in chronic stress-induced affective behaviors. Using a chronic
unpredictable mild stress mouse depression model, we studied expression of TRIM32
in brain tissue samples and observed behavioral changes in Trim32 knockout mice. 
The results showed that TRIM32 protein but not its mRNA was significantly reduced
in hippocampus in a time-dependent manner within 8 weeks of chronic stress. These
stress-induced affective behaviors and reduction of TRIM32 protein expression
were significantly reversed by antidepressant fluoxetine treatment. In addition, 
Trim32 knockout mice showed reduced anxiety and depressive behaviors and
hyperactivities compared with Trim32 wild-type mice under normal and mild stress 
conditions. We conclude that TRIM32 plays important roles in regulation of
hyperactivities and positively regulates the development of anxiety and
depression disorders induced by chronic stress.

(c) 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24839933  [PubMed - in process]


35. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Jul;165B(5):391-8. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32243. Epub 2014 May 19.

Association of CDH11 with non-syndromic ASD.

Crepel A(1), De Wolf V, Brison N, Ceulemans B, Walleghem D, Peuteman G,
Lambrechts D, Steyaert J, Noens I, Devriendt K, Peeters H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium; Leuven Autism Research (LAuRes), Leuven, Belgium.

We report a sporadic patient with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), mild
intellectual disability and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with 
a de novo partial deletion of CADHERIN 11 (CDH11). The deletion is associated
with one of the breakpoints of a de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement
46,XY,t(3;16;5)(q29;q22;q15)inv4(p14;q21)ins(4;5)(q21;q14.3q15). Cadherins are
cell adhesion molecules involved in synaptic plasticity. Since genetic evidence
points towards a role for cadherins in ASD, we studied the possible contribution 
of CDH11 to ASD. A case-control association study for 14 SNP variants in 519 ASD 
cases and 1,192 controls showed significant overrepresentation of rs7187376C/C
genotypes in the patient group [P = 0.0049 (Chi-square = 7.90 1 df) and O.R. 3.88
C.I. = 1.403-10.733]. There was no association for C/T versus T/T [P = 0.6772
(Chi-square = 0.17 1 df)] nor was there association at the allelic level
[P = 0.4373 (Chi-square = 0.6 1 df)]. In addition to the association of common
variants in CDH11 with ASD, we studied the possible contribution of rare variants
by sequencing CDH11 in 247 patients, and found three novel variants in the coding
region of CDH1, of which two variants were unlikely to be causal. Targeted CNV
screening in these 247 patients did not reveal copy number variation in CDH11. In
conclusion, the data provide evidence for the involvement of CDH11 in ASD which
is consistent with the association of other cadherins with ASD and
neuropsychiatric diseases.

(c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24839052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014 May 6;8:283. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00283. eCollection 
2014.

Evolutionary conservation in genes underlying human psychiatric disorders.

Ogawa LM(1), Vallender EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical
School Southborough, MA, USA.

Many psychiatric diseases observed in humans have tenuous or absent analogs in
other species. Most notable among these are schizophrenia and autism. One
hypothesis has posited that these diseases have arisen as a consequence of human 
brain evolution, for example, that the same processes that led to advances in
cognition, language, and executive function also resulted in novel diseases in
humans when dysfunctional. Here, the molecular evolution of the protein-coding
regions of genes associated with these and other psychiatric disorders are
compared among species. Genes associated with psychiatric disorders are drawn
from the literature and orthologous sequences are collected from eleven primate
species (human, chimpanzee, bonobo, gorilla, orangutan, gibbon, macaque, baboon, 
marmoset, squirrel monkey, and galago) and 34 non-primate mammalian species.
Evolutionary parameters, including dN/dS, are calculated for each gene and
compared between disease classes and among species, focusing on humans and
primates compared to other mammals, and on large-brained taxa (cetaceans,
rhinoceros, walrus, bear, and elephant) compared to their small-brained sister
species. Evidence of differential selection in humans to the exclusion of
non-human primates was absent, however elevated dN/dS was detected in catarrhines
as a whole, as well as in cetaceans, possibly as part of a more general trend.
Although this may suggest that protein changes associated with schizophrenia and 
autism are not a cost of the higher brain function found in humans, it may also
point to insufficiencies in the study of these diseases including incomplete or
inaccurate gene association lists and/or a greater role of regulatory changes or 
copy number variation. Through this work a better understanding of the molecular 
evolution of the human brain, the pathophysiology of disease, and the genetic
basis of human psychiatric disease is gained.

PMCID: PMC4018557
PMID: 24834046  [PubMed]


37. Autism Res. 2014 Jun;7(3):355-62. doi: 10.1002/aur.1378. Epub 2014 May 12.

Modest impact on risk for autism spectrum disorder of rare copy number variants
at 15q11.2, specifically breakpoints 1 to 2.

Chaste P(1), Sanders SJ, Mohan KN, Klei L, Song Y, Murtha MT, Hus V, Lowe JK,
Willsey AJ, Moreno-De-Luca D, Yu TW, Fombonne E, Geschwind D, Grice DE, Ledbetter
DH, Lord C, Mane SM, Martin DM, Morrow EM, Walsh CA, Sutcliffe JS, State MW,
Martin CL, Devlin B, Beaudet AL, Cook EH Jr, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; FondaMental Foundation, Creteil, France.

The proximal region of chromosome 15 is one of the genomic hotspots for copy
number variants (CNVs). Among the rearrangements observed in this region, CNVs
from the interval between the common breakpoints 1 and 2 (BP1 and BP2) have been 
reported cosegregating with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Although evidence
supporting an association between BP1-BP2 CNVs and autism accumulates, the
magnitude of the effect of BP1-BP2 CNVs remains elusive, posing a great challenge
to recurrence-risk counseling. To gain further insight into their pathogenicity
for ASD, we estimated the penetrance of the BP1-BP2 CNVs for ASD as well as their
effects on ASD-related phenotypes in a well-characterized ASD sample (n = 2525
families). Transmission disequilibrium test revealed significant preferential
transmission only for the duplicated chromosome in probands (20T:9NT). The
penetrance of the BP1-BP2 CNVs for ASD was low, conferring additional risks of
0.3% (deletion) and 0.8% (duplication). Stepwise regression analyses suggest a
greater effect of the CNVs on ASD-related phenotype in males and when maternally 
inherited. Taken together, the results are consistent with BP1-BP2 CNVs as risk
factors for autism. However, their effect is modest, more akin to that seen for
common variants. To be consistent with the current American College of Medical
Genetics guidelines for interpretation of postnatal CNV, the BP1-BP2 deletion and
duplication CNVs would probably best be classified as variants of uncertain
significance (VOUS): they appear to have an impact on risk, but one so modest
that these CNVs do not merit pathogenic status.

(c) 2014 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24821083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Aug;164A(8):1991-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36602. Epub 2014
May 9.

Intragenic rearrangements in X-linked intellectual deficiency: results of a-CGH
in a series of 54 patients and identification of TRPC5 and KLHL15 as potential
XLID genes.

Mignon-Ravix C(1), Cacciagli P, Choucair N, Popovici C, Missirian C, Milh M,
Megarbane A, Busa T, Julia S, Girard N, Badens C, Sigaudy S, Philip N, Villard L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR_S 910, Marseille, France; Aix Marseille Universite, GMGF,
Marseille, France.

High-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) enables the
detection of intragenic rearrangements, such as single exon deletion or
duplication. This approach can lead to the identification of new disease genes.
We report on the analysis of 54 male patients presenting with intellectual
deficiency (ID) and a family history suggesting X-linked (XL) inheritance or
maternal skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI), using a home-made
X-chromosome-specific microarray covering the whole human X-chromosome at high
resolution. The majority of patients had whole genome array-CGH prior to the
selection and we did not include large rearrangements such as MECP2 and FMR1
duplications. We identified four rearrangements considered as causative or
potentially pathogenic, corresponding to a detection rate of 8%. Two CNVs
affected known XLID genes and were therefore considered as causative (IL1RAPL1
and OPHN1 intragenic deletions). Two new CNVs were considered as potentially
pathogenic as they affected interesting candidates for ID. The first CNV is a
deletion of the first exon of the TRPC5 gene, encoding a cation channel
implicated in dendrite growth and patterning, in a child presenting with ID and
an autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The second CNV is a partial deletion of
KLHL15, in a patient with severe ID, epilepsy, and anomalies of cortical
development. In both cases, in spite of strong arguments for clinical relevance, 
we were not able at this stage to confirm pathogenicity of the mutations, and the
causality of the variants identified in XLID remains to be confirmed.

(c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24817631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Ann Neurol. 2014 Jun;75(6):943-58. doi: 10.1002/ana.24178. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Copy number variation plays an important role in clinical epilepsy.

Olson H(1), Shen Y, Avallone J, Sheidley BR, Pinsky R, Bergin AM, Berry GT, Duffy
FH, Eksioglu Y, Harris DJ, Hisama FM, Ho E, Irons M, Jacobsen CM, James P,
Kothare S, Khwaja O, Lipton J, Loddenkemper T, Markowitz J, Maski K, Megerian JT,
Neilan E, Raffalli PC, Robbins M, Roberts A, Roe E, Rollins C, Sahin M, Sarco D, 
Schonwald A, Smith SE, Soul J, Stoler JM, Takeoka M, Tan WH, Torres AR, Tsai P,
Urion DK, Weissman L, Wolff R, Wu BL, Miller DT, Poduri A.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Genetics Program, Division of Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology
and Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital,
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2014 Sep;10(9):490-1.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of copy number abnormalities detectable using
chromosomal microarray (CMA) testing in patients with epilepsy at a tertiary care
center.
METHODS: We identified patients with International Classification of Diseases,
ninth revision (ICD-9) codes for epilepsy or seizures and clinical CMA testing
performed between October 2006 and February 2011 at Boston Children's Hospital.
We reviewed medical records and included patients who met criteria for epilepsy. 
We phenotypically characterized patients with epilepsy-associated abnormalities
on CMA.
RESULTS: Of 973 patients who had CMA and ICD-9 codes for epilepsy or seizures,
805 patients satisfied criteria for epilepsy. We observed 437 copy number
variants (CNVs) in 323 patients (1-4 per patient), including 185 (42%) deletions 
and 252 (58%) duplications. Forty (9%) were confirmed de novo, 186 (43%) were
inherited, and parental data were unavailable for 211 (48%). Excluding full
chromosome trisomies, CNV size ranged from 18kb to 142Mb, and 34% were >500kb. In
at least 40 cases (5%), the epilepsy phenotype was explained by a CNV, including 
29 patients with epilepsy-associated syndromes and 11 with likely
disease-associated CNVs involving epilepsy genes or "hotspots." We observed
numerous recurrent CNVs including 10 involving loss or gain of Xp22.31, a region 
described in patients with and without epilepsy.
INTERPRETATION: Copy number abnormalities play an important role in patients with
epilepsy. Because the diagnostic yield of CMA for epilepsy patients is similar to
the yield in autism spectrum disorders and in prenatal diagnosis, for which
published guidelines recommend testing with CMA, we recommend the implementation 
of CMA in the evaluation of unexplained epilepsy.

(c) 2014 American Neurological Association.

PMID: 24811917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Jun;165B(4):337-44. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32236. Epub 2014 May 8.

Adult neuropsychiatric expression and familial segregation of 2q13 duplications.

Costain G(1), Lionel AC, Fu F, Stavropoulos DJ, Gazzellone MJ, Marshall CR,
Scherer SW, Bassett AS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Research Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

New genomic disorders associated with large, rare, recurrent copy number
variations (CNVs) are being discovered at a rapid pace. Detailed phenotyping and 
family studies are rare, however, as are data on adult phenotypic expression.
Duplications at 2q13 were recently identified as risk factors for developmental
delay/autism and reported in the prenatal setting, yet few individuals (all
children) have been extensively phenotyped. During a genome-wide CNV study of
schizophrenia, we identified two unrelated probands with 2q13 duplications. In
this study, detailed phenotyping and genotyping using high-resolution microarrays
was performed for 12 individuals across their two families. 2q13 duplications
were present in six adults, and co-segregated with clinically significant
later-onset neuropsychiatric disorders. Convergent lines of evidence implicated
GABAminergic dysfunction. Analysis of the genic content revealed promising
candidates for neuropsychiatric disease, including BCL2L11, ANAPC1, and MERTK.
Intrafamilial genetic heterogeneity and "second hits" in one family may have been
the consequence of assortative mating. Clinical genetic testing for the 2q13
duplication and the associated genetic counseling was well received. In summary, 
large rare 2q13 duplications appear to be associated with variable adult
neuropsychiatric and other expression. The findings represent progress toward
clinical translation of research results in schizophrenia. There are implications
for other emerging genomic disorders where there is interest in lifelong
expression.

(c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24807792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Jul;19(7):762-73. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.40. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

Copy number variation in schizophrenia in Sweden.

Szatkiewicz JP(1), O'Dushlaine C(2), Chen G(1), Chambert K(2), Moran JL(2), Neale
BM(2), Fromer M(3), Ruderfer D(3), Akterin S(4), Bergen SE(5), Kahler A(4),
Magnusson PK(4), Kim Y(1), Crowley JJ(1), Rees E(6), Kirov G(6), O'Donovan MC(6),
Owen MJ(6), Walters J(6), Scolnick E(2), Sklar P(3), Purcell S(7), Hultman CM(4),
McCarroll SA(8), Sullivan PF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, NY, USA. (4)Department of Medical Epidemiology, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. (5)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] Department of Medical Epidemiology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (6)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric
Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical
Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. (7)1] Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] 
Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(8)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. (9)1] Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA [2] Department of Medical Epidemiology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a highly heritable neuropsychiatric disorder of complex
genetic etiology. Previous genome-wide surveys have revealed a greater burden of 
large, rare copy number variations (CNVs) in SCZ cases and identified multiple
rare recurrent CNVs that increase risk of SCZ although with incomplete penetrance
and pleiotropic effects. Identification of additional recurrent CNVs and
biological pathways enriched for SCZ CNVs requires greater sample sizes. We
conducted a genome-wide survey for CNVs associated with SCZ using a Swedish
national sample (4719 cases and 5917 controls). High-confidence CNV calls were
generated using genotyping array intensity data, and their effect on risk of SCZ 
was measured. Our data confirm increased burden of large, rare CNVs in SCZ cases 
as well as significant associations for recurrent 16p11.2 duplications, 22q11.2
deletions and 3q29 deletions. We report a novel association for 17q12
duplications (odds ratio=4.16, P=0.018), previously associated with autism and
mental retardation but not SCZ. Intriguingly, gene set association analyses
implicate biological pathways previously associated with SCZ through common
variation and exome sequencing (calcium channel signaling and binding partners of
the fragile X mental retardation protein). We found significantly increased
burden of the largest CNVs (>500 kb) in genes present in the postsynaptic
density, in genomic regions implicated via SCZ genome-wide association studies
and in gene products localized to mitochondria and cytoplasm. Our findings
suggest that multiple lines of genomic inquiry--genome-wide screens for CNVs,
common variation and exonic variation--are converging on similar sets of pathways
and/or genes.

PMCID: PMC4271733
PMID: 24776740  [PubMed - in process]


42. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 May 1;94(5):677-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.018. Epub
2014 Apr 24.

Convergence of genes and cellular pathways dysregulated in autism spectrum
disorders.

Pinto D, Delaby E, Merico D, Barbosa M, Merikangas A, Klei L, Thiruvahindrapuram 
B, Xu X, Ziman R, Wang Z, Vorstman JA, Thompson A, Regan R, Pilorge M, Pellecchia
G, Pagnamenta AT, Oliveira B, Marshall CR, Magalhaes TR, Lowe JK, Howe JL,
Griswold AJ, Gilbert J, Duketis E, Dombroski BA, De Jonge MV, Cuccaro M, Crawford
EL, Correia CT, Conroy J, Conceicao IC, Chiocchetti AG, Casey JP, Cai G, Cabrol
C, Bolshakova N, Bacchelli E, Anney R, Gallinger S, Cotterchio M, Casey G,
Zwaigenbaum L, Wittemeyer K, Wing K, Wallace S, van Engeland H, Tryfon A, Thomson
S, Soorya L, Roge B, Roberts W, Poustka F, Mouga S, Minshew N, McInnes LA, McGrew
SG, Lord C, Leboyer M, Le Couteur AS, Kolevzon A, Jimenez Gonzalez P, Jacob S,
Holt R, Guter S, Green J, Green A, Gillberg C, Fernandez BA, Duque F, Delorme R, 
Dawson G, Chaste P, Cafe C, Brennan S, Bourgeron T, Bolton PF, Bolte S, Bernier
R, Baird G, Bailey AJ, Anagnostou E, Almeida J, Wijsman EM, Vieland VJ, Vicente
AM, Schellenberg GD, Pericak-Vance M, Paterson AD, Parr JR, Oliveira G,
Nurnberger JI, Monaco AP, Maestrini E, Klauck SM, Hakonarson H, Haines JL,
Geschwind DH, Freitag CM, Folstein SE, Ennis S, Coon H, Battaglia A, Szatmari P, 
Sutcliffe JS, Hallmayer J, Gill M, Cook EH, Buxbaum JD, Devlin B, Gallagher L,
Betancur C, Scherer SW.

Rare copy-number variation (CNV) is an important source of risk for autism
spectrum disorders (ASDs). We analyzed 2,446 ASD-affected families and confirmed 
an excess of genic deletions and duplications in affected versus control groups
(1.41-fold, p = 1.0 x 10(-5)) and an increase in affected subjects carrying
exonic pathogenic CNVs overlapping known loci associated with dominant or
X-linked ASD and intellectual disability (odds ratio = 12.62, p = 2.7 x 10(-15), 
[?]3% of ASD subjects). Pathogenic CNVs, often showing variable expressivity,
included rare de novo and inherited events at 36 loci, implicating ASD-associated
genes (CHD2, HDAC4, and GDI1) previously linked to other neurodevelopmental
disorders, as well as other genes such as SETD5, MIR137, and HDAC9. Consistent
with hypothesized gender-specific modulators, females with ASD were more likely
to have highly penetrant CNVs (p = 0.017) and were also overrepresented among
subjects with fragile X syndrome protein targets (p = 0.02). Genes affected by de
novo CNVs and/or loss-of-function single-nucleotide variants converged on
networks related to neuronal signaling and development, synapse function, and
chromatin regulation.

Copyright (c) 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4067558
PMID: 24768552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Apr 24;55(5):3258-64. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-14339.

Gene-rich large deletions are overrepresented in POAG patients of Indian and
Caucasian origins.

Kaurani L(1), Vishal M(2), Kumar D(3), Sharma A(4), Mehani B(1), Sharma C(5),
Chakraborty S(6), Jha P(1), Ray J(7), Sen A(8), Dash D(3), Ray K(9), Mukhopadhyay
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, Delhi, India. (2)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, CSIR-Institute of
Genomics and Integrative Biology, Delhi, India Molecular and Human Genetics
Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India. (3)G. N.
Ramachandran Knowledge Centre for Genome Informatics, CSIR-Institute of Genomics 
and Integrative Biology, Delhi, India. (4)Genomics and Molecular Medicine,
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Delhi, India Academy of
Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. (5)Mathematics
Department, Shiv Nadar University, Uttar Pradesh, India. (6)Molecular and Human
Genetics Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India S.
N. Pradhan Centre for Neurosciences, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India.
(7)S. N. Pradhan Centre for Neurosciences, University of Calcutta, Kolkata,
India. (8)Dristi Pradip, Kolkata, India. (9)Molecular and Human Genetics
Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India Academy of
Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India.

PURPOSE: Large copy number variations (CNV) can contribute to increased burden
for neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we analyzed the genome-wide burden
of large CNVs > 100 kb in primary open angle glaucoma (POAG), a neurodegenerative
disease of the eye that is the largest cause of irreversible blindness.
METHODS: Genome-wide analysis of CNVs > 100 kb were analyzed in a total of 1720
individuals, including an Indian cohort (347 POAG cases and 345 controls) and a
Caucasian cohort (624 cases and 404 controls). All the CNV data were obtained
from experiments performed on Illumina 660W-Quad (infinium) arrays.
RESULTS: We observed that for both the populations CNVs > 1 Mb was significantly 
enriched for gene-rich regions unique to the POAG cases (P < 10(-11)). In the
Indian cohort CNVs > 1 Mb (39 calls) in patients influenced 125 genes while in
controls 31 such CNVs influenced only 5 genes with no overlap. In both cohorts we
observed 1.9-fold gene enrichment in patients for deletions compared to
duplications, while such a bias was not observed in controls (0.3-fold). Overall 
duplications > 1 Mb were more than deletions (Del/Dup = 0.82) confirming that the
enrichment of gene-rich deletions in patients was associated with the disease. Of
the 39 CNVs > 1 Mb from Indian patients, 28 (72%) also were implicated in other
neurodegenerative disorders, like autism, schizophrenia, sensorineural hearing
loss, and so forth. We found one large duplication encompassing CNTN4 gene in
Indian and Caucasian POAG patients that was absent in the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, our study is the first report on large CNV bias
for gene-rich regions in glaucomatous neurodegeneration, implicating its impact
across populations of contrasting ethnicities. We identified CNTN4 as a novel
candidate gene for POAG.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4039367
PMID: 24764060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. No To Hattatsu. 2014 Mar;46(2):125-30.

[Genetic analysis and genes relating synaptic function for autism spectrum
disorder].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamagata T, Matsumoto A, Nagata K.

PMID: 24738190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Genes (Basel). 2014 Feb 27;5(1):97-105. doi: 10.3390/genes5010097.

Phenotype-Based Genetic Association Studies (PGAS)-Towards Understanding the
Contribution of Common Genetic Variants to Schizophrenia Subphenotypes.

Ehrenreich H(1), Nave KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Str.3, 37075
Gottingen, Germany. ehrenreich@em.mpg.de. (2)Max Planck Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Str.3, 37075 Gottingen, Germany. nave@em.mpg.de.

Neuropsychiatric diseases ranging from schizophrenia to affective disorders and
autism are heritable, highly complex and heterogeneous conditions, diagnosed
purely clinically, with no supporting biomarkers or neuroimaging criteria.
Relying on these "umbrella diagnoses", genetic analyses, including genome-wide
association studies (GWAS), were undertaken but failed to provide insight into
the biological basis of these disorders. "Risk genotypes" of unknown significance
with low odds ratios of mostly <1.2 were extracted and confirmed by including
ever increasing numbers of individuals in large multicenter efforts. Facing these
results, we have to hypothesize that thousands of genetic constellations in
highly variable combinations with environmental co-factors can cause the
individual disorder in the sense of a final common pathway. This would explain
why the prevalence of mental diseases is so high and why mutations, including
copy number variations, with a higher effect size than SNPs, constitute only a
small part of variance. Elucidating the contribution of normal genetic variation 
to (disease) phenotypes, and so re-defining disease entities, will be extremely
labor-intense but crucial. We have termed this approach PGAS ("phenotype-based
genetic association studies"). Ultimate goal is the definition of biological
subgroups of mental diseases. For that purpose, the GRAS (Gottingen Research
Association for Schizophrenia) data collection was initiated in 2005. With >3000 
phenotypical data points per patient, it comprises the world-wide largest
currently available schizophrenia database (N > 1200), combining genome-wide SNP 
coverage and deep phenotyping under highly standardized conditions. First PGAS
results on normal genetic variants, relevant for e.g., cognition or catatonia,
demonstrated proof-of-concept. Presently, an autistic subphenotype of
schizophrenia is being defined where an unfortunate accumulation of normal
genotypes, so-called pro-autistic variants of synaptic genes, explains part of
the phenotypical variance. Deep phenotyping and comprehensive clinical data sets,
however, are expensive and it may take years before PGAS will complement
conventional GWAS approaches in psychiatric genetics.

PMCID: PMC3978514
PMID: 24705289  [PubMed]


46. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2014 Mar;2(2):166-75. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.57. Epub 2014 Jan 
9.

Chromosomal microarray analysis as a first-tier clinical diagnostic test:
Estonian experience.

Zilina O(1), Teek R(2), Tammur P(3), Kuuse K(3), Yakoreva M(4), Vaidla E(3),
Molter-Vaar T(3), Reimand T(5), Kurg A(6), Ounap K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital Tartu, 
Estonia ; Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of Tartu Tartu, Estonia. (2)Department of Genetics, United
Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital Tartu, Estonia ; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Tartu Tartu, Estonia. (3)Department of Genetics, United
Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital Tartu, Estonia. (4)Department of
Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital Tartu, Estonia ;
Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and Translation Medicine,
University of Tartu Tartu, Estonia. (5)Department of Genetics, United
Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital Tartu, Estonia ; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Tartu Tartu, Estonia ; Department of Biomedicine,
Institute of Biomedicine and Translation Medicine, University of Tartu Tartu,
Estonia. (6)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of Tartu Tartu, Estonia.

Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) is now established as the first-tier
cytogenetic diagnostic test for fast and accurate detection of chromosomal
abnormalities in patients with developmental delay/intellectual disability
(DD/ID), multiple congenital anomalies (MCA), and autism spectrum disorders
(ASD). We present our experience with using CMA for postnatal and prenatal
diagnosis in Estonian patients during 2009-2012. Since 2011, CMA is on the
official service list of the Estonian Health Insurance Fund and is performed as
the first-tier cytogenetic test for patients with DD/ID, MCA or ASD. A total of
1191 patients were analyzed, including postnatal (1072 [90%] patients and 59 [5%]
family members) and prenatal referrals (60 [5%] fetuses). Abnormal results were
reported in 298 (25%) patients, with a total of 351 findings (1-3 per
individual): 147 (42%) deletions, 106 (30%) duplications, 89 (25%) long
contiguous stretches of homozygosity (LCSH) events (>5 Mb), and nine (3%)
aneuploidies. Of all findings, 143 (41%) were defined as pathogenic or likely
pathogenic; for another 143 findings (41%), most of which were LCSH, the clinical
significance remained unknown, while 61 (18%) reported findings can now be
reclassified as benign or likely benign. Clinically relevant findings were
detected in 126 (11%) patients. However, the proportion of variants of unknown
clinical significance was quite high (41% of all findings). It seems that our
ability to detect chromosomal abnormalities has far outpaced our ability to
understand their role in disease. Thus, the interpretation of CMA findings
remains a rather difficult task requiring a close collaboration between
clinicians and cytogeneticists.

PMCID: PMC3960059
PMID: 24689080  [PubMed]


47. Transl Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 25;4:e374. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.16.

The autism and schizophrenia associated gene CYFIP1 is critical for the
maintenance of dendritic complexity and the stabilization of mature spines.

Pathania M(1), Davenport EC(1), Muir J(1), Sheehan DF(1), Lopez-Domenech G(1),
Kittler JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology, University College
London, London, UK.

Copy number variation (CNV) at the 15q11.2 region has been identified as a
significant risk locus for neurological and neuropsychiatric conditions such as
schizophrenia (SCZ) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, the individual
roles for genes at this locus in nervous system development, function and
connectivity remain poorly understood. Haploinsufficiency of one gene in this
region, Cyfip1, may provide a model for 15q11.2 CNV-associated neuropsychiatric
phenotypes. Here we show that altering CYFIP1 expression levels in neurons both
in vitro and in vivo influences dendritic complexity, spine morphology, spine
actin dynamics and synaptic a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA) receptor lateral diffusion. CYFIP1 is highly enriched at synapses and its 
overexpression in vitro leads to increased dendritic complexity. Neurons derived 
from Cyfip1 heterozygous animals on the other hand, possess reduced dendritic
complexity, increased mobile F-actin and enhanced GluA2-containing AMPA receptor 
mobility at synapses. Interestingly, Cyfip1 overexpression or haploinsufficiency 
increased immature spine number, whereas activity-dependent changes in spine
volume were occluded in Cyfip1 haploinsufficient neurons. In vivo, Cyfip1
heterozygous animals exhibited deficits in dendritic complexity as well as an
altered ratio of immature-to-mature spines in hippocampal CA1 neurons. In
summary, we provide evidence that dysregulation of CYFIP1 expression levels leads
to pathological changes in CNS maturation and neuronal connectivity, both of
which may contribute to the development of the neurological symptoms seen in ASD 
and SCZ.

PMCID: PMC3966042
PMID: 24667445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 25;9(3):e90947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090947. eCollection
2014.

Assessing the impact of copy number variants on miRNA genes in autism by Monte
Carlo simulation.

Marrale M(1), Albanese NN(1), Cali F(2), Romano V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, Universita di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(2)U.O.C. di Genetica Medica Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Associazione
Oasi Maria SS. (I.R.C.C.S.), Troina, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, 
Universita di Palermo, Palermo, Italy; U.O.C. di Genetica Medica Laboratorio di
Genetica Molecolare, Associazione Oasi Maria SS. (I.R.C.C.S.), Troina, Italy.

Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) are childhood neurodevelopmental disorders with 
complex genetic origins. Previous studies have investigated the role of de novo
Copy Number Variants (CNVs) and microRNAs as important but distinct etiological
factors in ASD. We developed a novel computational procedure to assess the
potential pathogenic role of microRNA genes overlapping de novo CNVs in ASD
patients. Here we show that for chromosomes # 1, 2 and 22 the actual number of
miRNA loci affected by de novo CNVs in patients was found significantly higher
than that estimated by Monte Carlo simulation of random CNV events. Out of 24
miRNA genes over-represented in CNVs from these three chromosomes only
hsa-mir-4436b-1 and hsa-mir-4436b-2 have not been detected in CNVs from
non-autistic subjects as reported in the Database of Genomic Variants. Altogether
the results reported in this study represent a first step towards a full
understanding of how a dysregulated expression of the 24 miRNAs genes affect
neurodevelopment in autism. We also propose that the procedure used in this study
can be effectively applied to CNVs/miRNA genes association data in other genomic 
disorders beyond autism.

PMCID: PMC3965395
PMID: 24667286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1411-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36458. Epub 2014
Mar 24.

Outfoxed by RBFOX1-a caution about ascertainment bias.

Kamien B(1), Lionel AC, Bain N, Scherer SW, Hunter M.

Author information: 
(1)Hunter Genetics, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia; The University of
Newcastle, School of Medicine and Public Health, Newcastle, New South Wales,
Australia.

We report on two patients with intragenic deletions of RBFOX1 and one patient
with an intragenic duplication of RBFOX1. These patients, by report, all had
autism spectrum disorder and/or developmental delay and had strong family
histories of these conditions. We initially hypothesized that RBFOX1 was another 
susceptibility locus for autism spectrum disorder or developmental delay.
However, epidemiological evidence examining large numbers of individuals did not 
support this hypothesis and the data presented here suggests that RBFOX1
intragenic copy number variants are not pathogenic. This contradicts previous
reports that examined smaller numbers of patients and controls. (c) 2014 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

(c) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24664471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 20;10(3):e1004241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004241.
eCollection 2014.

DUF1220 dosage is linearly associated with increasing severity of the three
primary symptoms of autism.

Davis JM(1), Searles VB(2), Anderson N(1), Keeney J(1), Dumas L(1), Sikela JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, Human Medical Genetics and
Genomics Program & Neuroscience Program, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, Human Medical Genetics and
Genomics Program & Neuroscience Program, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America;
Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr;10(4):e1004373.

One of the three most frequently documented copy number variations associated
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a 1q21.1 duplication that encompasses
sequences encoding DUF1220 protein domains, the dosage of which we previously
implicated in increased human brain size. Further, individuals with ASD
frequently display accelerated brain growth and a larger brain size that is also 
associated with increased symptom severity. Given these findings, we investigated
the relationship between DUF1220 copy number and ASD severity, and here show that
in individuals with ASD (n = 170), the copy number (dosage) of DUF1220 subtype
CON1 is highly variable, ranging from 56 to 88 copies following a Gaussian
distribution. More remarkably, in individuals with ASD CON1 copy number is also
linearly associated, in a dose-response manner, with increased severity of each
of the three primary symptoms of ASD: social deficits (p = 0.021), communicative 
impairments (p = 0.030), and repetitive behaviors (p = 0.047). These data
indicate that DUF1220 protein domain (CON1) dosage has an ASD-wide effect and, as
such, is likely to be a key component of a major pathway underlying ASD severity.
Finally, these findings, by implicating the dosage of a previously unexamined,
copy number polymorphic and brain evolution-related gene coding sequence in ASD
severity, provide an important new direction for further research into the
genetic factors underlying ASD.

PMCID: PMC3961203
PMID: 24651471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Neurogenetics. 2014 May;15(2):117-27. doi: 10.1007/s10048-014-0394-0. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Identification of risk genes for autism spectrum disorder through copy number
variation analysis in Austrian families.

Egger G(1), Roetzer KM, Noor A, Lionel AC, Mahmood H, Schwarzbraun T, Boright O, 
Mikhailov A, Marshall CR, Windpassinger C, Petek E, Scherer SW, Kaschnitz W,
Vincent JB.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Section, R-30, The Campbell Family Brain Research Institute, The
Centre for Addiction & Mental Health (CAMH), 250 College Street, Toronto, ON, M5T
1R8, Canada.

Autism or autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a range of neurodevelopmental
disorders starting in early childhood and is characterized by impairments in
communication and reciprocal social interaction and presence of restricted and
repetitive patterns of behavior. The contribution of genetic factors to autism is
clear in twin and family studies. It is apparent that, overall, ASD is a complex 
non-Mendelian disorder. Recent studies suggest that copy number variations (CNVs)
play a significant role in the etiology of ASD. For the current work, we
recruited 245 family members from 73 ASD families from Styria, Austria. The DNA
from probands was genotyped with Affymetrix single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
6.0 microarrays to screen for CNVs in their genomes. Analysis of the microarray
data was performed using three different algorithms, and a list of stringent
calls was compared to existing CNV data from over 2,357 controls of European
ancestry. For stringent calls not present in controls, quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) was used to validate the CNVs in the probands and in their family
members. Twenty-two CNVs were validated from this set (five of which are
apparently de novo), many of which appear likely to disrupt genes that may be
considered as good candidates for neuropsychiatric disorders, including DLG2,
S100B, ARX, DIP2A, HPCAL1, and GPHN. Several others disrupt genes that have
previously been implicated in autism, such as BDNF, AUTS2, DPP6, and C18orf22,
and our data add to the growing evidence of their involvement in ASD.

PMID: 24643514  [PubMed - in process]


52. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2014 Mar-Apr;22(2):65-75. doi: 10.1097/HRP.0000000000000002.

Autism spectrum disorder genetics: diverse genes with diverse clinical outcomes.

Talkowski ME(1), Minikel EV, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)From Harvard Medical School (Drs. Talkowski and Gusella); Department of
Neurology (Drs. Talkowski and Gusella), Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental
Genetics Unit (Dr. Talkowski) and Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Center for Human 
Genetic Research (Drs. Talkowski and Gusella, and Mr. Minikel), Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA.

The last several years have seen unprecedented advances in deciphering the
genetic etiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Heritability studies have
repeatedly affirmed a contribution of genetic factors to the overall disease
risk. Technical breakthroughs have enabled the search for these genetic factors
via genome-wide surveys of a spectrum of potential sequence variations, from
common single-nucleotide polymorphisms to essentially private chromosomal
abnormalities. Studies of copy-number variation have identified significant roles
for both recurrent and nonrecurrent large dosage imbalances, although they have
rarely revealed the individual genes responsible. More recently, discoveries of
rare point mutations and characterization of balanced chromosomal abnormalities
have pinpointed individual ASD genes of relatively strong effect, including both 
loci with strong a priori biological relevance and those that would have
otherwise been unsuspected as high-priority biological targets. Evidence has also
emerged for association with many common variants, each adding a small individual
contribution to ASD risk. These findings collectively provide compelling
empirical data that the genetic basis of ASD is highly heterogeneous, with
hundreds of genes capable of conferring varying degrees of risk, depending on
their nature and the predisposing genetic alteration. Moreover, many genes that
have been implicated in ASD also appear to be risk factors for related
neurodevelopmental disorders, as well as for a spectrum of psychiatric
phenotypes. While some ASD genes have evident functional significance, like
synaptic proteins such as the SHANKs, neuroligins, and neurexins, as well as
fragile x mental retardation-associated proteins, ASD genes have also been
discovered that do not present a clear mechanism of specific neurodevelopmental
dysfunction, such as regulators of chromatin modification and global gene
expression. In its sum, the progress from genetic studies to date has been
remarkable and increasingly rapid, but the interactive impact of strong-effect
genetic lesions coupled with weak-effect common polymorphisms has not yet led to 
a unified understanding of ASD pathogenesis or explained its highly variable
clinical expression. With an increasingly firm genetic foundation, the coming
years will hopefully see equally rapid advances in elucidating the functional
consequences of ASD genes and their interactions with environmental/experiential 
factors, supporting the development of rational interventions.

PMID: 24614762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Mar 6;94(3):415-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.02.001. Epub
2014 Feb 27.

A higher mutational burden in females supports a "female protective model" in
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Jacquemont S(1), Coe BP(2), Hersch M(3), Duyzend MH(2), Krumm N(2), Bergmann
S(3), Beckmann JS(4), Rosenfeld JA(5), Eichler EE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Service of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Lausanne, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne 1011, Switzerland. Electronic address:
sebastien.jacquemont@chuv.ch. (2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (3)Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne 1005, Switzerland; Swiss institute
of Bioinformatics, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland. (4)Swiss institute
of Bioinformatics, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland. (5)Signature Genomic Laboratories 
LLC, PerkinElmer Inc., Spokane, WA 99207, USA. (6)Department of Genome Sciences, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute. Electronic address: eee@gs.washington.edu.

Increased male prevalence has been repeatedly reported in several
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDs), leading to the concept of a "female
protective model." We investigated the molecular basis of this sex-based
difference in liability and demonstrated an excess of deleterious autosomal
copy-number variants (CNVs) in females compared to males (odds ratio [OR] = 1.46,
p = 8 x 10(-10)) in a cohort of 15,585 probands ascertained for NDs. In an
independent autism spectrum disorder (ASD) cohort of 762 families, we found a
3-fold increase in deleterious autosomal CNVs (p = 7 x 10(-4)) and an excess of
private deleterious single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in female compared to male 
probands (OR = 1.34, p = 0.03). We also showed that the deleteriousness of
autosomal SNVs was significantly higher in female probands (p = 0.0006). A
similar bias was observed in parents of probands ascertained for NDs. Deleterious
CNVs (>400 kb) were maternally inherited more often (up to 64%, p = 10(-15)) than
small CNVs < 400 kb (OR = 1.45, p = 0.0003). In the ASD cohort, increased
maternal transmission was also observed for deleterious CNVs and SNVs. Although
ASD females showed higher mutational burden and lower cognition, the excess
mutational burden remained, even after adjustment for those cognitive
differences. These results strongly suggest that females have an increased
etiological burden unlinked to rare deleterious variants on the X chromosome.
Carefully phenotyped and genotyped cohorts will be required for identifying the
symptoms, which show gender-specific liability to mutational burden.

Copyright (c) 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951938
PMID: 24581740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Case Rep Genet. 2014;2014:516529. doi: 10.1155/2014/516529. Epub 2014 Jan 19.

Absence of substantial copy number differences in a pair of monozygotic twins
discordant for features of autism spectrum disorder.

Laplana M(1), Royo JL(1), Aluja A(2), Lopez R(3), Heine-Sunyer D(4), Fibla J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetic Unit, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Lleida, 25198 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain ; Genetics of Complex Diseases Research
Group, Biomedical Research Institute of Lleida (IRBLleida), 25198 Lleida,
Catalonia, Spain. (2)Biological-Factorial Models of Personality, Department of
Psychology, University of Lleida, 25001 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain. (3)Human
Genetic Unit, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Lleida, 25198
Lleida, Catalonia, Spain ; Clinical Analysis Service, Universitari Arnau de
Vilanova University Hospital, 25198 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain. (4)Department of
Genetics, Son Espases University Hospital, 07120 Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable disease (~0.9) with a
complex genetic etiology. It is initially characterized by altered cognitive
ability which commonly includes impaired language and communication skills as
well as fundamental deficits in social interaction. Despite the large amount of
studies described so far, the high clinical diversity affecting the autism
phenotype remains poorly explained. Recent studies suggest that rare genomic
variations, in particular copy number variation (CNV), may account for a
significant proportion of the genetic basis of ASD. The use of disease-discordant
monozygotic twins represents a powerful strategy to identify de novo and
inherited CNV in the disorder. Here we present the results of a comparative
genome hybridization (CGH) analysis with a pair of monozygotic twins affected of 
ASD with significant differences in their clinical manifestations that specially 
affect speech language impairment and communication skills. Array CGH was
performed in three different tissues: blood, saliva, and hair follicle, in an
attempt to identify germinal and somatic CNV regions that may explain these
differences. Our results argue against a role of large CNV rearrangements as a
molecular etiology of the observed differences. This forwards future research to 
explore de novo point mutation and epigenomic alterations as potential
explanations of the observed clinical differences.

PMCID: PMC3915920
PMID: 24563798  [PubMed]


55. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2014 May;18(3):327-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.01.004.
Epub 2014 Jan 25.

Etiological yield of SNP microarrays in idiopathic intellectual disability.

Utine GE(1), Haliloglu G(2), Volkan-Salanci B(3), Cetinkaya A(4), Kiper PO(3),
Alanay Y(3), Aktas D(4), Anlar B(2), Topcu M(2), Boduroglu K(3), Alikasifoglu
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey; Hacettepe
University, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address:
geutine@hacettepe.edu.tr. (2)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics,
Ankara, Turkey; Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara, 
Turkey. (3)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey;
Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey;
Hacettepe University, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.

Intellectual disability (ID) has a prevalence of 3% and is classified according
to its severity. An underlying etiology cannot be determined in 75-80% in mild
ID, and in 20-50% of severe ID. After it has been shown that copy number
variations involving short DNA segments may cause ID, genome-wide SNP microarrays
are being used as a tool for detecting submicroscopic copy number changes and
uniparental disomy. This study was performed to investigate the presence of copy 
number changes in patients with ID of unidentified etiology. Affymetrix((r)) 6.0
SNP microarray platform was used for analysis of 100 patients and their healthy
parents, and data were evaluated using various databases and literature.
Etiological diagnoses were made in 12 patients (12%). Homozygous deletion in
NRXN1 gene and duplication in IL1RAPL1 gene were detected for the first time. Two
separate patients had deletions in FOXP2 and UBE2A genes, respectively, for which
only few patients have recently been reported. Interstitial and subtelomeric copy
number changes were described in 6 patients, in whom routine cytogenetic tools
revealed normal results. In one patient uniparental disomy type of Angelman
syndrome was diagnosed. SNP microarrays constitute a screening test able to
detect very small genomic changes, with a high etiological yield even in patients
already evaluated using traditional cytogenetic tools, offer analysis for
uniparental disomy and homozygosity, and thereby are helpful in finding novel
disease-causing genes: for these reasons they should be considered as a
first-tier genetic screening test in the evaluation of patients with ID and
autism.

Copyright (c) 2014 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan 30;10(1):e1004139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004139.
eCollection 2014.

Large inverted duplications in the human genome form via a fold-back mechanism.

Hermetz KE(1), Newman S(1), Conneely KN(2), Martin CL(1), Ballif BC(3), Shaffer
LG(3), Cody JD(4), Rudd MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America. (2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America ;
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University School of Public
Health, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America. (3)Signature Genomic
Laboratories, PerkinElmer, Inc., Spokane, Washington, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America ; The Chromosome 18
Registry and Research Society, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America.

Inverted duplications are a common type of copy number variation (CNV) in
germline and somatic genomes. Large duplications that include many genes can lead
to both neurodevelopmental phenotypes in children and gene amplifications in
tumors. There are several models for inverted duplication formation, most of
which include a dicentric chromosome intermediate followed by
breakage-fusion-bridge (BFB) cycles, but the mechanisms that give rise to the
inverted dicentric chromosome in most inverted duplications remain unknown. Here 
we have combined high-resolution array CGH, custom sequence capture,
next-generation sequencing, and long-range PCR to analyze the breakpoints of 50
nonrecurrent inverted duplications in patients with intellectual disability,
autism, and congenital anomalies. For half of the rearrangements in our study, we
sequenced at least one breakpoint junction. Sequence analysis of breakpoint
junctions reveals a normal-copy disomic spacer between inverted and non-inverted 
copies of the duplication. Further, short inverted sequences are present at the
boundary of the disomic spacer and the inverted duplication. These data support a
mechanism of inverted duplication formation whereby a chromosome with a
double-strand break intrastrand pairs with itself to form a "fold-back"
intermediate that, after DNA replication, produces a dicentric inverted
chromosome with a disomic spacer corresponding to the site of the fold-back loop.
This process can lead to inverted duplications adjacent to terminal deletions,
inverted duplications juxtaposed to translocations, and inverted duplication ring
chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC3907307
PMID: 24497845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nature. 2014 Feb 13;506(7487):185-90. doi: 10.1038/nature12975. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

A polygenic burden of rare disruptive mutations in schizophrenia.

Purcell SM(1), Moran JL(2), Fromer M(3), Ruderfer D(4), Solovieff N(5), Roussos
P(6), O'Dushlaine C(7), Chambert K(7), Bergen SE(8), Kahler A(9), Duncan L(10),
Stahl E(6), Genovese G(7), Fernandez E(11), Collins MO(12), Komiyama NH(12),
Choudhary JS(12), Magnusson PK(9), Banks E(13), Shakir K(13), Garimella K(13),
Fennell T(13), DePristo M(13), Grant SG(14), Haggarty SJ(15), Gabriel S(13),
Scolnick EM(7), Lander ES(13), Hultman CM(9), Sullivan PF(16), McCarroll SA(17), 
Sklar P(18).

Author information: 
(1)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Division of Psychiatric
Genomics, Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York 10029, USA [3] Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA [4]
Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental
Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA
[5] Medical and Population Genetics Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (2)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA
[2]. (3)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Division of Psychiatric
Genomics, Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York 10029, USA [3] Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA [4]
Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental
Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA
[5]. (4)1] Division of Psychiatric Genomics, Department of Psychiatry, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA [2] Institute
for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, New York 10029, USA [3]. (5)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,
Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (6)1] Division of Psychiatric Genomics,
Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York 10029, USA [2] Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA. (7)Stanley Center for 
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA. (8)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Department 
of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm
SE-171 77, Sweden. (9)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm SE-171 77, Sweden. (10)1] Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,
Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA [3] Medical and Population Genetics Program,
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (11)1]
Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] VIB Center for
Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (12)Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, The
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (13)Medical and
Population Genetics Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA. (14)Genes to Cognition Programme, Centre for Clinical
Brain Sciences and Centre for Neuroregeneration, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK. (15)1] Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Analytic
and Translational Genetics Unit, Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics
Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA [3]
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (16)Departments of Genetics and Psychiatry,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7264, USA. (17)1]
Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Medical and Population Genetics Program, 
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [3]
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(18)1] Division of Psychiatric Genomics, Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA [2] Institute for
Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, New York 10029, USA [3] Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Schizophrenia is a common disease with a complex aetiology, probably involving
multiple and heterogeneous genetic factors. Here, by analysing the exome
sequences of 2,536 schizophrenia cases and 2,543 controls, we demonstrate a
polygenic burden primarily arising from rare (less than 1 in 10,000), disruptive 
mutations distributed across many genes. Particularly enriched gene sets include 
the voltage-gated calcium ion channel and the signalling complex formed by the
activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated scaffold protein (ARC) of the
postsynaptic density, sets previously implicated by genome-wide association and
copy-number variation studies. Similar to reports in autism, targets of the
fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP, product of FMR1) are enriched for
case mutations. No individual gene-based test achieves significance after
correction for multiple testing and we do not detect any alleles of moderately
low frequency (approximately 0.5 to 1 per cent) and moderately large effect.
Taken together, these data suggest that population-based exome sequencing can
discover risk alleles and complements established gene-mapping paradigms in
neuropsychiatric disease.

PMCID: PMC4136494
PMID: 24463508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 27;8(12):e85093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085093.
eCollection 2013.

Random or stochastic monoallelic expressed genes are enriched for
neurodevelopmental disorder candidate genes.

Jeffries AR(1), Collier DA(2), Vassos E(3), Curran S(3), Ogilvie CM(4), Price
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Centre for the Cellular Basis of Behaviour,
Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Discovery Neuroscience Research, Eli Lilly and Company Limited, Surrey, United
Kingdom ; Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom. (3)Social, Genetic and
Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom. (4)Cytogenetics Department, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.

Random or stochastic monoallelic expressed genes (StMA genes) represent a unique 
form of monoallelic expression where allelic choice is made at random early in
development. The consequential clonal diversity provides opportunity for
functional heterozygosity in tissues such as the brain, and can impact on both
development and disease. We investigate the relationship of StMA expressed genes 
previously identified in clonal neural stem cells with the neurodevelopmental
disorders autism and schizophrenia. We found that StMA genes show an
overrepresentation of schizophrenia risk candidates identified by genome wide
association studies from the genetic association database. Similar suggestive
enrichment was also found for genes from the NHGRI genome-wide association study 
catalog and a psychiatric genetics consortium schizophrenia dataset although
these latter more robust gene lists did not achieve statistical significance. We 
also examined multiple sources of copy number variation (CNV) datasets from
autism and schizophrenia cohorts. After taking into account total gene numbers
and CNV size, both autism and schizophrenia associated CNVs appeared to show an
enrichment of StMA genes relative to the control CNV datasets. Since the StMA
genes were originally identified in neural stem cells, bias due to the neural
transcriptome is possible. To address this, we randomly sampled neural stem cell 
expressed genes and repeated the tests. After a significant number of iterations,
neural stem cell expressed genes did not show an overrepresentation in autism or 
schizophrenia CNV datasets. Therefore, irrespective of the neural derived
transcriptome, StMA genes originally identified in neural stem cells show an
overrepresentation in CNVs associated with autism and schizophrenia. If this
association is functional, then the regulation (or dysregulation) of this form of
allelic expression status within tissues such as the brain may be a contributory 
risk factor for neurodevelopmental disorders and may also influence disease
discordance sometimes observed in monozygotic twins.

PMCID: PMC3874034
PMID: 24386451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 May 15;23(10):2752-68. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt669. Epub 2013 Dec
30.

Disruption of the ASTN2/TRIM32 locus at 9q33.1 is a risk factor in males for
autism spectrum disorders, ADHD and other neurodevelopmental phenotypes.

Lionel AC(1), Tammimies K, Vaags AK, Rosenfeld JA, Ahn JW, Merico D, Noor A,
Runke CK, Pillalamarri VK, Carter MT, Gazzellone MJ, Thiruvahindrapuram B,
Fagerberg C, Laulund LW, Pellecchia G, Lamoureux S, Deshpande C, Clayton-Smith J,
White AC, Leather S, Trounce J, Melanie Bedford H, Hatchwell E, Eis PS, Yuen RK, 
Walker S, Uddin M, Geraghty MT, Nikkel SM, Tomiak EM, Fernandez BA, Soreni N,
Crosbie J, Arnold PD, Schachar RJ, Roberts W, Paterson AD, So J, Szatmari P,
Chrysler C, Woodbury-Smith M, Brian Lowry R, Zwaigenbaum L, Mandyam D, Wei J,
Macdonald JR, Howe JL, Nalpathamkalam T, Wang Z, Tolson D, Cobb DS, Wilks TM,
Sorensen MJ, Bader PI, An Y, Wu BL, Musumeci SA, Romano C, Postorivo D, Nardone
AM, Monica MD, Scarano G, Zoccante L, Novara F, Zuffardi O, Ciccone R, Antona V, 
Carella M, Zelante L, Cavalli P, Poggiani C, Cavallari U, Argiropoulos B, Chernos
J, Brasch-Andersen C, Speevak M, Fichera M, Ogilvie CM, Shen Y, Hodge JC,
Talkowski ME, Stavropoulos DJ, Marshall CR, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics.

Rare copy number variants (CNVs) disrupting ASTN2 or both ASTN2 and TRIM32 have
been reported at 9q33.1 by genome-wide studies in a few individuals with
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). The vertebrate-specific astrotactins, ASTN2 
and its paralog ASTN1, have key roles in glial-guided neuronal migration during
brain development. To determine the prevalence of astrotactin mutations and
delineate their associated phenotypic spectrum, we screened ASTN2/TRIM32 and
ASTN1 (1q25.2) for exonic CNVs in clinical microarray data from 89 985
individuals across 10 sites, including 64 114 NDD subjects. In this clinical
dataset, we identified 46 deletions and 12 duplications affecting ASTN2.
Deletions of ASTN1 were much rarer. Deletions near the 3' terminus of ASTN2,
which would disrupt all transcript isoforms (a subset of these deletions also
included TRIM32), were significantly enriched in the NDD subjects (P = 0.002)
compared with 44 085 population-based controls. Frequent phenotypes observed in
individuals with such deletions include autism spectrum disorder (ASD), attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), speech delay, anxiety and obsessive
compulsive disorder (OCD). The 3'-terminal ASTN2 deletions were significantly
enriched compared with controls in males with NDDs, but not in females. Upon
quantifying ASTN2 human brain RNA, we observed shorter isoforms expressed from an
alternative transcription start site of recent evolutionary origin near the 3'
end. Spatiotemporal expression profiling in the human brain revealed consistently
high ASTN1 expression while ASTN2 expression peaked in the early embryonic
neocortex and postnatal cerebellar cortex. Our findings shed new light on the
role of the astrotactins in psychopathology and their interplay in human
neurodevelopment.

PMCID: PMC3990173 [Available on 2015-05-15]
PMID: 24381304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Feb;57(2-3):81-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.12.005. Epub
2013 Dec 28.

A prenatal case of split-hand malformation associated with 17p13.3 triplication -
a dilemma in genetic counseling.

Luk HM(1), Wong VC(2), Lo IF(1), Chan KY(3), Lau ET(3), Kan AS(4), Tang MH(5),
Tang WF(6), She WM(2), Chu YW(2), Sin WK(7), Chung BH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetic Service, Department of Health, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka 
Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Prenatal Diagnostic and Counseling
Department, Tsan Yuk Hospital, Hong Kong, China. (4)Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China; Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong
Kong, China. (5)Prenatal Diagnostic and Counseling Department, Tsan Yuk Hospital,
Hong Kong, China. (6)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Li Ka Shing Faculty 
of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (7)Department of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Tuen Mun Hospital, Hong Kong, China. (8)Department of
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Department of Obstetrics
& Gynaecology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. Electronic address: bhychung@hku.hk.

Copy number gain of 17p13.3 has been shown to be associated with developmental
delay/autism and Split-Hand-Foot malformation. We report a case of fetus with
bilateral split-hand malformation detected on prenatal ultrasound. Array
comparative genomic hybridization detected 2 maternally inherited copy number
gains in the 17p13.3 region with one of them involving the BHLHA9 gene and part
of the YWHAE gene. The mother is normal in intelligence with mild right foot
anomaly only. Although the BHLHA9 copy gain is known to be associated with
split-hand-foot malformation, the penetrance and expressivity is highly variable.
More challenging is the effect of partial YWHAE copy number gain on
neurodevelopment is inconclusive based on current literature. This case
highlights the difficulties of prenatal genetic counseling in array comparative
genomic hybridization findings in clinical situation with incomplete
understanding of genotype-phenotype correlation.

Copyright (c) 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24380768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014 Feb;68(2):85-95. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12128. Epub 2013
Dec 29.

Copy-number variation in the pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorder.

Shishido E(1), Aleksic B, Ozaki N.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Tokyo, Japan; Restart
Postdoctoral Fellowship of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo,
Japan; Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Autism spectrum disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder present in 1% of the
population, characterized by impairments in reciprocal social interaction,
communication deficits and restricted patterns of behavior. Approximately 10% of 
the autism spectrum disorder population is thought to have large chromosomal
rearrangements. Copy-number variations (CNV) alter the genome structure either by
duplication or deletion of a chromosomal region. The association between CNV and 
autism susceptibility has become more apparent through the use of methods based
on comparative genomic hybridization in screening CNV. The nature of the high CNV
rate in the human genome is partly explained by non-allelic homologous
recombination between flanking repeated sequences derived from multiple copies of
transposons or mobile genetic elements. There are hotspots for CNV in the human
genome, such as 16p11.2 and 22q11.2. Genes involved in CNV are supposed to have
copy-number dose-dependent effects on the behavior of affected individuals.
Animal models give insight into the possible interactions between core genetic
loci and additional factors contributing to the phenotypes of each individual. If
affected genes code for cellular signaling molecules, reducing the dosage in the 
intracellular signaling pathway may result in the malfunction of the nervous
system. The genetic background of autism spectrum disorder is highly heterogenic 
and most common or rare CNV do not lead to autism spectrum disorders in the
majority of cases, but may occasionally increase the risk of developing an autism
spectrum disorder.

(c) 2013 The Authors. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences (c) 2013 Japanese Society
of Psychiatry and Neurology.

PMID: 24372918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Syndromol. 2015 Feb;6(1):7-22. doi: 10.1159/000371594. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Connecting the CNTNAP2 Networks with Neurodevelopmental Disorders.

Poot M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Based on genomic rearrangements and copy number variations, the
contactin-associated protein-like 2 gene (CNTNAP2) has been implicated in
neurodevelopmental disorders such as Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, intellectual
disability, obsessive compulsive disorder, cortical dysplasia-focal epilepsy
syndrome, autism, schizophrenia, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. To explain the phenotypic pleiotropy of CNTNAP2
alterations, several hypotheses have been put forward. Those include gene
disruption, loss of a gene copy by a heterozygous deletion, altered regulation of
gene expression due to loss of transcription factor binding and DNA methylation
sites, and mutations in the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein which may 
provoke altered interactions of the CNTNAP2-encoded protein, Caspr2, with other
proteins. Also exome sequencing, which covers <0.2% of the CNTNAP2 genomic DNA,
has revealed numerous single nucleotide variants in healthy individuals and in
patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. In some of these disorders,
disruption of CNTNAP2 may be interpreted as a susceptibility factor rather than a
directly causative mutation. In addition to being associated with impaired
development of language, CNTNAP2 may turn out to be a central node in the
molecular networks controlling neurodevelopment. This review discusses the impact
of CNTNAP2 mutations on its functioning at multiple levels of the combinatorial
genetic networks that govern brain development. In addition, recommendations for 
genomic testing in the context of clinical genetic management of patients with
neurodevelopmental disorders and their families are put forward.

PMID: 25852443  [PubMed]


2. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 27;11(3):e1004998. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004998.
eCollection 2015.

Synergistic Interactions between Drosophila Orthologues of Genes Spanned by De
Novo Human CNVs Support Multiple-Hit Models of Autism.

Grice SJ(1), Liu JL(1), Webber C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology,
Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are highly heritable and characterised by
deficits in social interaction and communication, as well as restricted and
repetitive behaviours. Although a number of highly penetrant ASD gene variants
have been identified, there is growing evidence to support a causal role for
combinatorial effects arising from the contributions of multiple loci. By
examining synaptic and circadian neurological phenotypes resulting from the
dosage variants of unique human:fly orthologues in Drosophila, we observe
numerous synergistic interactions between pairs of informatically-identified
candidate genes whose orthologues are jointly affected by large de novo copy
number variants (CNVs). These CNVs were found in the genomes of individuals with 
autism, including a patient carrying a 22q11.2 deletion. We first demonstrate
that dosage alterations of the unique Drosophila orthologues of candidate genes
from de novo CNVs that harbour only a single candidate gene display neurological 
defects similar to those previously reported in Drosophila models of
ASD-associated variants. We then considered pairwise dosage changes within the
set of orthologues of candidate genes that were affected by the same single human
de novo CNV. For three of four CNVs with complete orthologous relationships, we
observed significant synergistic effects following the simultaneous dosage change
of gene pairs drawn from a single CNV. The phenotypic variation observed at the
Drosophila synapse that results from these interacting genetic variants supports 
a concordant phenotypic outcome across all interacting gene pairs following the
direction of human gene copy number change. We observe both specificity and
transitivity between interactors, both within and between CNV candidate gene
sets, supporting shared and distinct genetic aetiologies. We then show that
different interactions affect divergent synaptic processes, demonstrating
distinct molecular aetiologies. Our study illustrates mechanisms through which
synergistic effects resulting from large structural variation can contribute to
human disease.

PMCID: PMC4376901
PMID: 25816101  [PubMed - in process]


3. Hum Genet. 2015 Mar 20. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of 26 deletion CNVs reveals the frequent occurrence of
micro-mutations within the breakpoint-flanking regions and frequent repair of
double-strand breaks by templated insertions derived from remote genomic regions.

Wang Y(1), Su P, Hu B, Zhu W, Li Q, Yuan P, Li J, Guan X, Li F, Jing X, Li R,
Zhang Y, Ferec C, Cooper DN, Wang J, Huang D, Chen JM, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Zhongshan School of Medicine and Center for
Genome Research, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.

Copy number variations (CNVs) have increasingly been reported to cause, or
predispose to, human disease. However, a large fraction of these CNVs have not
been accurately characterized at the single-base-pair level, thereby hampering a 
better understanding of the mutational mechanisms underlying CNV formation. Here,
employing a composite pipeline method derived from various inference-based
programs, we have characterized 26 deletion CNVs [including three novel
pathogenic CNVs involving an autosomal gene (EXT2) causing hereditary
osteochondromas and an X-linked gene (CLCN5) causing Dent disease, as well as 23 
CNVs previously identified by inference from a cohort of Canadian autism spectrum
disorder families] to the single-base-pair level of accuracy from whole-genome
sequencing data. We found that breakpoint-flanking micro-mutations (within 22 bp 
of the breakpoint) are present in a significant fraction (5/26; 19 %) of the
deletion CNVs. This analysis also provided evidence that a recently described
error-prone form of DNA repair (i.e., repair of DNA double-strand breaks by
templated nucleotide sequence insertions derived from distant regions of the
genome) not only causes human genetic disease but also impacts on human genome
evolution. Our findings illustrate the importance of precise CNV breakpoint
delineation for understanding the underlying mutational mechanisms and have
implications for primer design in relation to the detection of deletion CNVs in
clinical diagnosis.

PMID: 25792359  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. BMC Med Genomics. 2015;8 Suppl 1:S7. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S1-S7. Epub 2015
Jan 15.

Performance of case-control rare copy number variation annotation in
classification of autism.

Engchuan W, Dhindsa K, Lionel AC, Scherer SW, Chan JH, Merico D.

BACKGROUND: A substantial proportion of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) risk
resides in de novo germline and rare inherited genetic variation. In particular, 
rare copy number variation (CNV) contributes to ASD risk in up to 10% of ASD
subjects. Despite the striking degree of genetic heterogeneity, case-control
studies have detected specific burden of rare disruptive CNV for neuronal and
neurodevelopmental pathways. Here, we used machine learning methods to classify
ASD subjects and controls, based on rare CNV data and comprehensive gene
annotations. We investigated performance of different methods and estimated the
percentage of ASD subjects that could be reliably classified based on presumed
etiologic CNV they carry.
RESULTS: We analyzed 1,892 Caucasian ASD subjects and 2,342 matched controls.
Rare CNVs (frequency 1% or less) were detected using Illumina 1M and 1M-Duo
BeadChips. Conditional Inference Forest (CF) typically performed as well as or
better than other classification methods. We found a maximum AUC (area under the 
ROC curve) of 0.533 when considering all ASD subjects with rare genic CNVs,
corresponding to 7.9% correctly classified ASD subjects and less than 3%
incorrectly classified controls; performance was significantly higher when
considering only subjects harboring de novo or pathogenic CNVs. We also found
rare losses to be more predictive than gains and that curated neurally-relevant
annotations (brain expression, synaptic components and neurodevelopmental
phenotypes) outperform Gene Ontology and pathway-based annotations.
CONCLUSIONS: CF is an optimal classification approach for case-control rare CNV
data and it can be used to prioritize subjects with variants potentially
contributing to ASD risk not yet recognized. The neurally-relevant annotations
used in this study could be successfully applied to rare CNV case-control
data-sets for other neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC4315323
PMID: 25783485  [PubMed - in process]


5. Autism Res. 2015 Mar 7. doi: 10.1002/aur.1469. [Epub ahead of print]

Neuroanatomical Phenotypes Are Consistent With Autism-Like Behavioral Phenotypes 
in the 15q11-13 Duplication Mouse Model.

Ellegood J(1), Nakai N, Nakatani J, Henkelman M, Takumi T, Lerch J.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario Canada
(J.E., R.M.H., J.L.).

Paternally and maternally inherited deletions and duplications of human
chromosome 15q11-13 are relatively common in the human population. Furthermore,
duplications in the 15q region are often associated with autism. Both maternal
and paternal interstitial 15q11-13 duplication mouse models have been previously 
created, where several behavioral differences were found in the paternal
duplication (patDp/+) mouse but not in the maternal duplication (matDp/+). These 
included decreased sociability, behavioral inflexibility, abnormal ultrasonic
vocalizations, decreased spontaneous activity, and increased anxiety. Similarly, 
in the current study, we found several anatomical differences in the patDp/+ mice
that were not seen in the matDp/+ mice. Regional differences that are evident
only in the paternal duplication are a smaller dentate gyrus and smaller medial
striatum. These differences may be responsible for the behavioral inflexibility. 
Furthermore, a smaller dorsal raphe nucleus could be responsible for the reported
serotonin defects. This study highlights consistency that can be found between
behavioral and anatomical phenotyping. Autism Res 2015. (c) 2015 International
Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

(c) 2015 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25755142  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Jan 22. pii: S0197-4580(15)00044-5. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.01.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Rare structural genetic variation in human prion diseases.

Lukic A(1), Uphill J(1), Brown CA(1), Beck J(1), Poulter M(1), Campbell T(1),
Adamson G(1), Hummerich H(1), Whitfield J(1), Ponto C(2), Zerr I(2), Lloyd SE(1),
Collinge J(1), Mead S(3).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Prion Unit and Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of
Neurology, London, UK. (2)Department of Neurology, Georg-August University
Gottingen, Gottingen, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenrative Diseases
(DZNE), Gottingen, Germany. (3)MRC Prion Unit and Department of Neurodegenerative
Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK. Electronic address:
s.mead@prion.ucl.ac.uk.

Prion diseases are a diverse group of neurodegenerative conditions, caused by the
templated misfolding of prion protein. Aside from the strong genetic risk
conferred by multiple variants of the prion protein gene (PRNP), several other
variants have been suggested to confer risk in the most common type, sporadic
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) or in the acquired prion diseases. Large and
rare copy number variants (CNVs) are known to confer risk in several related
disorders including Alzheimer's disease (at APP), schizophrenia, epilepsy, mental
retardation, and autism. Here, we report the first genome-wide analysis for
CNV-associated risk using data derived from a recent international collaborative 
association study in sCJD (n = 1147 after quality control) and publicly available
controls (n = 5427). We also investigated UK patients with variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (n = 114) and elderly women from the Eastern Highlands 
of Papua New Guinea who proved highly resistant to the epidemic prion disease
kuru, who were compared with healthy young Fore population controls (n = 395).
There were no statistically significant alterations in the burden of CNVs >100,
>500, or >1000 kb, duplications, or deletions in any disease group or geographic 
region. After correction for multiple testing, no statistically significant
associations were found. A UK blood service control sample showed a duplication
CNV that overlapped PRNP, but these were not found in prion disease. Heterozygous
deletions of a 3' region of the PARK2 gene were found in 3 sCJD patients and no
controls (p = 0.001, uncorrected). A cell-based prion infection assay did not
provide supportive evidence for a role for PARK2 in prion disease susceptibility.
These data are consistent with a modest impact of CNVs on risk of late-onset
neurologic conditions and suggest that, unlike APP, PRNP duplication is not a
causal high-risk mutation.

Copyright (c) 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25726360  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Mol Autism. 2014 Aug 20;5:44. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-44. eCollection 2014.

Gene expression analysis of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons
carrying copy number variants of chromosome 15q11-q13.1.

Germain ND(1), Chen PF(1), Plocik AM(1), Glatt-Deeley H(1), Brown J(2), Fink
JJ(3), Bolduc KA(3), Robinson TM(3), Levine ES(3), Reiter LT(4), Graveley BR(5), 
Lalande M(1), Chamberlain SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06032, USA. (2)Chromosome
Core, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and Department of Allied Health
Sciences, University of Connecticut, 354 Mansfield Road, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (4)Department of Neurology,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 855 Monroe Avenue, Suite 415,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA. (5)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology,
University of Connecticut Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT
06032, USA ; University of Connecticut Institute for Systems Genomics,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Duplications of the chromosome 15q11-q13.1 region are associated with
an estimated 1 to 3% of all autism cases, making this copy number variation (CNV)
one of the most frequent chromosome abnormalities associated with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). Several genes located within the 15q11-q13.1 duplication region
including ubiquitin protein ligase E3A (UBE3A), the gene disrupted in Angelman
syndrome (AS), are involved in neural function and may play important roles in
the neurobehavioral phenotypes associated with chromosome 15q11-q13.1 duplication
(Dup15q) syndrome.
METHODS: We have generated induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from five
different individuals containing CNVs of 15q11-q13.1. The iPSC lines were
differentiated into mature, functional neurons. Gene expression across the
15q11-q13.1 locus was compared among the five iPSC lines and corresponding
iPSC-derived neurons using quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR).
Genome-wide gene expression was compared between neurons derived from three iPSC 
lines using mRNA-Seq.
RESULTS: Analysis of 15q11-q13.1 gene expression in neurons derived from Dup15q
iPSCs reveals that gene copy number does not consistently predict expression
levels in cells with interstitial duplications of 15q11-q13.1. mRNA-Seq
experiments show that there is substantial overlap in the genes differentially
expressed between 15q11-q13.1 deletion and duplication neurons, Finally, we
demonstrate that UBE3A transcripts can be pharmacologically rescued to normal
levels in iPSC-derived neurons with a 15q11-q13.1 duplication.
CONCLUSIONS: Chromatin structure may influence gene expression across the
15q11-q13.1 region in neurons. Genome-wide analyses suggest that common neuronal 
pathways may be disrupted in both the Angelman and Dup15q syndromes. These data
demonstrate that our disease-specific stem cell models provide a new tool to
decipher the underlying cellular and genetic disease mechanisms of ASD and may
also offer a pathway to novel therapeutic intervention in Dup15q syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4332023
PMID: 25694803  [PubMed]


8. Epilepsia. 2015 Mar;56(3):e26-32. doi: 10.1111/epi.12920. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Investigating the genetic basis of fever-associated syndromic epilepsies using
copy number variation analysis.

Hartmann C(1), von Spiczak S, Suls A, Weckhuysen S, Buyse G, Vilain C, Van
Bogaert P, De Jonghe P, Cook J, Muhle H, Stephani U, Helbig I, Mefford HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropediatrics, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein,
Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany.

Fever-associated syndromic epilepsies ranging from febrile seizures plus (FS+) to
Dravet syndrome have a significant genetic component. However, apart from SCN1A
mutations in >80% of patients with Dravet syndrome, the genetic underpinnings of 
these epilepsies remain largely unknown. Therefore, we performed a genome-wide
screening for copy number variations (CNVs) in 36 patients with SCN1A-negative
fever-associated syndromic epilepsies. Phenotypes included Dravet syndrome
(n = 23; 64%), genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) and febrile
seizures plus (FS+) (n = 11; 31%) and unclassified fever-associated epilepsies
(n = 2; 6%). Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was performed using
Agilent 4 x 180K arrays. We identified 13 rare CNVs in 8 (22%) of 36 individuals.
These included known pathogenic CNVs in 4 (11%) of 36 patients: a 1q21.1
duplication in a proband with Dravet syndrome, a 14q23.3 deletion in a proband
with FS+, and two deletions at 16p11.2 and 1q44 in two individuals with
fever-associated epilepsy with concomitant autism and/or intellectual disability.
In addition, a 3q13.11 duplication in a patient with FS+ and two de novo
duplications at 7p14.2 and 18q12.2 in a patient with atypical Dravet syndrome
were classified as likely pathogenic. Six CNVs were of unknown significance. The 
identified genomic aberrations overlap with known neurodevelopmental disorders,
suggesting that fever-associated epilepsy syndromes may be a recurrent clinical
presentation of known microdeletion syndromes.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. (c) 2015 International League Against Epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC4363163 [Available on 2016-03-01]
PMID: 25690317  [PubMed - in process]


9. Genome Med. 2015 Feb 16;7(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0140-8. eCollection
2015.

Copy number variation and brain structure: lessons learned from chromosome
16p11.2.

Stein JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, Center for Autism Research and
Treatment, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA.

Recent work has linked specific genetic variation found in human populations to
risk for developing neuropsychiatric diseases. How that risk is mediated through 
molecular-, cellular- and systems-level mechanisms now becomes the central
question in this field. Two recent papers studying high-penetrance copy number
variation at chromosome 16p11.2 find large changes in brain structure, refining
hypotheses about the regions of the brain that are affected and implicating
specific neurodevelopmental processes in these changes.

PMCID: PMC4329653
PMID: 25688292  [PubMed]


10. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Feb 11. pii: bhv008. [Epub ahead of print]

Auditory Evoked M100 Response Latency is Delayed in Children with 16p11.2
Deletion but not 16p11.2 Duplication.

Jenkins J 3rd(1), Chow V(1), Blaskey L(1), Kuschner E(1), Qasmieh S(1), Gaetz
L(1), Edgar JC(1), Mukherjee P(2), Buckner R(3), Nagarajan SS(2), Chung WK(4),
Spiro JE(5), Sherr EH(6), Berman JI(1), Roberts TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lurie Family Foundations MEG Imaging Center, Department of Radiology,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department
of Radiology. (3)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY 10032, USA. (5)Simons Foundation, New York, NY 10010, USA. (6)Department
of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Individuals with the 16p11.2 BP4-BP5 copy number variant (CNV) exhibit a range of
behavioral phenotypes that may include mild impairment in cognition and clinical 
diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). To better understand auditory
processing impairments in populations with this chromosomal variation, auditory
evoked responses were examined in children with the 16p11.2 deletion, 16p11.2
duplication, and age-matched controls. Stimuli consisted of sinusoidal binaural
tones presented passively while children underwent recording with
magnetoencephalography (MEG). The primary indicator of auditory processing
impairment was the latency of the [?]100-ms "M100" auditory response detected by
MEG, with the 16p11.2 deletion population exhibiting profoundly delayed M100
latencies relative to controls. This delay remained even after controlling for
potential confounds such as age and cognitive ability. No significant difference 
in M100 latency was observed between 16p11.2 duplication carriers and controls.
Additionally, children meeting diagnostic criteria for ASD (16p11.2 deletion
carriers) exhibited nonsignificant latency delays when compared with the
corresponding CNV carriers not meeting criteria for ASD. Present results indicate
that 16p11.2 deletion is associated with auditory processing delays analogous to 
(but substantially more pronounced than) those previously reported in
"idiopathic" ASD.

(c) The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25678630  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Apr;167(4):715-23. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36847. Epub 2015
Feb 5.

Analysis of CHRNA7 rare variants in autism spectrum disorder susceptibility.

Bacchelli E(1), Battaglia A, Cameli C, Lomartire S, Tancredi R, Thomson S,
Sutcliffe JS, Maestrini E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Bologna,
Italy.

Chromosome 15q13.3 recurrent microdeletions are causally associated with a wide
range of phenotypes, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), seizures,
intellectual disability, and other psychiatric conditions. Whether the reciprocal
microduplication is pathogenic is less certain. CHRNA7, encoding for the alpha7
subunit of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, is considered the
likely culprit gene in mediating neurological phenotypes in 15q13.3 deletion
cases. To assess if CHRNA7 rare variants confer risk to ASD, we performed copy
number variant analysis and Sanger sequencing of the CHRNA7 coding sequence in a 
sample of 135 ASD cases. Sequence variation in this gene remains largely
unexplored, given the existence of a fusion gene, CHRFAM7A, which includes a
nearly identical partial duplication of CHRNA7. Hence, attempts to sequence
coding exons must distinguish between CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A, making next-generation
sequencing approaches unreliable for this purpose. A CHRNA7 microduplication was 
detected in a patient with autism and moderate cognitive impairment; while no
rare damaging variants were identified in the coding region, we detected rare
variants in the promoter region, previously described to functionally reduce
transcription. This study represents the first sequence variant analysis of
CHRNA7 in a sample of idiopathic autism. (c) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

(c) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25655306  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2015 Feb-Mar;36(2):61-7. doi: 10.1097/DBP.0000000000000126.

Epigenetics of autism-related impairment: copy number variation and maternal
infection.

Mazina V(1), Gerdts J, Trinh S, Ankenman K, Ward T, Dennis MY, Girirajan S,
Eichler EE, Bernier R.

Author information: 
(1)*University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA; Departments of
+Psychiatry, and ++Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA;
SSDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA; ||Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA.

OBJECTIVE: Epidemiological data have suggested maternal infection and fever to be
associated with increased risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Animal studies 
show that gestational infections perturb fetal brain development and result in
offspring with the core features of autism and have demonstrated that behavioral 
effects of maternal immune activation are dependent on genetic susceptibility.
The goal of this study was to explore the impact of ASD-associated copy number
variants (CNVs) and prenatal maternal infection on clinical severity of ASD
within a dataset of prenatal history and complete genetic and phenotypic
findings.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the Simons Simplex Collection sample including
1971 children with a diagnosis of ASD aged 4 to 18 years who underwent array
comparative genomic hybridization screening. Information on infection and febrile
episodes during pregnancy was collected through parent interview. ASD severity
was clinically measured through parent-reported interview and questionnaires.
RESULTS: We found significant interactive effects between the presence of CNVs
and maternal infection during pregnancy on autistic symptomatology, such that
individuals with CNVs and history of maternal infection demonstrated increased
rates of social communicative impairments and repetitive/restricted behaviors. In
contrast, no significant interactions were found between presence of CNVs and
prenatal infections on cognitive and adaptive functioning of individuals with
ASD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support a gene-environment interaction model of autism 
impairment, in that individuals with ASD-associated CNVs are more susceptible to 
the effects of maternal infection and febrile episodes in pregnancy on behavioral
outcomes and suggest that these effects are specific to ASD rather than to global
neurodevelopment.

PMCID: PMC4318761 [Available on 2016-02-01]
PMID: 25629966  [PubMed - in process]


13. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan 26;11(1):e1004852. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004852.
eCollection 2015.

No evidence for association of autism with rare heterozygous point mutations in
Contactin-Associated Protein-Like 2 (CNTNAP2), or in Other Contactin-Associated
Proteins or Contactins.

Murdoch JD(1), Gupta AR(2), Sanders SJ(3), Walker MF(4), Keaney J(5), Fernandez
TV(6), Murtha MT(6), Anyanwu S(6), Ober GT(6), Raubeson MJ(6), DiLullo NM(6),
Villa N(7), Waqar Z(6), Sullivan C(6), Gonzalez L(6), Willsey AJ(3), Choe SY(8), 
Neale BM(9), Daly MJ(9), State MW(10).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University Department of Genetics, New Haven, Connecticut, United States 
of America. (2)Yale University Child Study Center, New Haven, Connecticut, United
States of America; Yale University Department of Pediatrics, New Haven,
Connecticut, United States of America. (3)Yale University Department of Genetics,
New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America; University of California, San
Francisco, Department of Psychiatry, San Francisco, California, United States of 
America. (4)University of California, San Francisco, Department of Psychiatry,
San Francisco, California, United States of America. (5)Yale College, New Haven, 
Connecticut, United States of America. (6)Yale University Child Study Center, New
Haven, Connecticut, United States of America. (7)UCLA David Geffen School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (8)UCLA School of
Law, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (9)Broad Institute of
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America; Analytic and
Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (10)Yale University Department of Genetics, New Haven, Connecticut,
United States of America; Yale University Child Study Center, New Haven,
Connecticut, United States of America; University of California, San Francisco,
Department of Psychiatry, San Francisco, California, United States of America.

Contactins and Contactin-Associated Proteins, and Contactin-Associated
Protein-Like 2 (CNTNAP2) in particular, have been widely cited as autism risk
genes based on findings from homozygosity mapping, molecular cytogenetics, copy
number variation analyses, and both common and rare single nucleotide association
studies. However, data specifically with regard to the contribution of
heterozygous single nucleotide variants (SNVs) have been inconsistent. In an
effort to clarify the role of rare point mutations in CNTNAP2 and related gene
families, we have conducted targeted next-generation sequencing and evaluated
existing sequence data in cohorts totaling 2704 cases and 2747 controls. We find 
no evidence for statistically significant association of rare heterozygous
mutations in any of the CNTN or CNTNAP genes, including CNTNAP2, placing marked
limits on the scale of their plausible contribution to risk.

PMCID: PMC4306541
PMID: 25621974  [PubMed - in process]


14. Meta Gene. 2013 Dec 4;2:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2013.10.005. eCollection
2014.

Dental developmental abnormalities in a patient with subtelomeric 7q36 deletion
syndrome may confirm a novel role for the SHH gene.

Linhares ND(1), Svartman M(2), Salgado MI(3), Rodrigues TC(4), da Costa SS(4),
Rosenberg C(4), Valadares ER(5).

Author information: 
(1)Setor de Citogenetica/Laboratorio Central do Hospital das Clinicas da
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. (2)Departamento de 
Biologia Geral, Instituto de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Cirurgia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil. (4)Departamento de Genetica e Biologia
Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil. (5)Departamento de Propedeutica Complementar, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Studies in mice demonstrated that the Shh gene is crucial for normal development 
of both incisors and molars, causing a severe retardation in tooth growth, which 
leads to abnormal placement of the tooth in the jaw and disrupted tooth
morphogenesis. In humans the SHH gene is located on chromosome 7q36. Defects in
its protein or signaling pathway may cause holoprosencephaly spectrum, a disorder
in which the developing forebrain fails to correctly separate into right and left
hemispheres and that can be manifested in microforms such as single maxillary
central incisor. A novel role for this gene in the developing human primary
dentition was recently demonstrated. We report a 12-year old boy with a de novo
7q36.1-qter deletion characterized by high-resolution karyotyping,
oligonucleotide aCGH and FISH. His phenotype includes intellectual disability,
non-verbal communication, hypospadia, partial sacral agenesis and absence of
coccyx, which are distinctive features of the syndrome and mainly correlated with
the MNX1, HTR5A and EN2 genes. No microforms of holoprosencephaly spectrum were
observed; but the patient had diastema and dental developmental abnormalities,
such as conical, asymmetric and tapered inferior central incisors. The dental
anomalies are reported herein for the first time in subtelomeric 7q36 deletion
syndrome and may confirm clinically a novel role for the SHH gene in dental
development.

PMCID: PMC4287791
PMID: 25606385  [PubMed]


15. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Mar;58(3):140-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.01.002. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

15q11.2 microdeletion (BP1-BP2) and developmental delay, behaviour issues,
epilepsy and congenital heart disease: A series of 52 patients.

Vanlerberghe C(1), Petit F(2), Malan V(3), Vincent-Delorme C(2), Bouquillon S(4),
Boute O(2), Holder-Espinasse M(5), Delobel B(6), Duban B(6), Vallee L(7), Cuisset
JM(7), Lemaitre MP(7), Vantyghem MC(8), Pigeyre M(8), Lanco-Dosen S(9), Plessis
G(10), Gerard M(10), Decamp M(10), Mathieu M(11), Morin G(11), Jedraszak G(11),
Bilan F(12), Gilbert-Dussardier B(13), Fauvert D(14), Roume J(15), Cormier-Daire 
V(16), Caumes R(16), Puechberty J(17), Genevieve D(17), Sarda P(17), Pinson
L(17), Blanchet P(17), Lemeur N(18), Sheth F(19), Manouvrier-Hanu S(2), Andrieux 
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de genetique medicale, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, France.
Electronic address: clemence.vanlerberghe@chru-lille.fr. (2)Service de genetique 
clinique, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, France. (3)Service de
cytogenetique et d'embryologie, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris,
France. (4)Institut de genetique medicale, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille,
France. (5)Service de genetique clinique, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, 
France; Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, London, UK. (6)Centre de
cytogenetique, Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul, Lille, France. (7)Service de
neuropediatrie, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, France. (8)Service
d'endocrinologie, Hopital Claude Huriez, CHRU Lille, France. (9)Service de
neuropediatrie, Hopital de Sambre - Avesnois, Maubeuge, France. (10)Service de
genetique clinique, CHU Caen, France. (11)Service de genetique clinique, CHU
Amiens, France. (12)Laboratoire de Genetique cellulaire et moleculaire, Pole
Biologie Sante, CHU Poitiers, France. (13)Service de genetique clinique, La
Miletrie, CHU Poitiers, France. (14)Service de cytogenetique, CHI Poissy, France.
(15)Unite de genetique medicale, CHI Poissy, France. (16)Unite de genetique
medicale, Hopital Necker-Enfants malades, AP-HP, Paris, France. (17)Service de
genetique medicale, CHRU Montpellier, France. (18)Service de cytogenetique, CHU
Rouen, France. (19)Institute of Human Genetics, Jodhpur Village Road, Gujarat,
India.

Proximal region of chromosome 15 long arm is rich in duplicons that, define five 
breakpoints (BP) for 15q rearrangements. 15q11.2 microdeletion between BP1 and
BP2 has been previously associated with developmental delay and atypical
psychological patterns. This region contains four highly-conserved and
non-imprinted genes: NIPA1, NIPA2, CYFIP1, TUBGCP5. Our goal was to investigate
the phenotypes associated with this microdeletion in a cohort of 52 patients.
This copy number variation (CNV) was prevalent in 0.8% patients presenting with
developmental delay, psychological pattern issues and/or multiple congenital
malformations. This was studied by array-CGH at six different French Genetic
laboratories. We collected data from 52 unrelated patients (including 3 foetuses)
after excluding patients with an associated genetic alteration (known CNV,
aneuploidy or known monogenic disease). Out of 52 patients, mild or moderate
developmental delay was observed in 68.3%, 85.4% had speech impairment and 63.4% 
had psychological issues such as Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder,
Autistic Spectrum Disorder or Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Seizures were noted 
in 18.7% patients and associated congenital heart disease in 17.3%. Parents were 
analysed for abnormalities in the region in 65.4% families. Amongst these
families, 'de novo' microdeletions were observed in 18.8% and 81.2% were
inherited from one of the parents. Incomplete penetrance and variable
expressivity were observed amongst the patients. Our results support the
hypothesis that 15q11.2 (BP1-BP2) microdeletion is associated with developmental 
delay, abnormal behaviour, generalized epilepsy and congenital heart disease. The
later feature has been rarely described. Incomplete penetrance and variability of
expression demands further assessment and studies.

Copyright (c) 2015. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 25596525  [PubMed - in process]


16. Annu Rev Med. 2015;66:487-507. doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-091113-024550.

From de novo mutations to personalized therapeutic interventions in autism.

Brandler WM(1), Sebat J.

Author information: 
(1)Beyster Center for Genomics of Psychiatric Diseases.

The high heritability, early age at onset, and reproductive disadvantages of
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are consistent with an etiology composed of
dominant-acting de novo (spontaneous) mutations. Mutation detection by microarray
analysis and DNA sequencing has confirmed that de novo copy-number variants or
point mutations in protein-coding regions of genes contribute to risk, and some
of the underlying causal variants and genes have been identified. As our
understanding of autism genes develops, the spectrum of autism is breaking up
into quanta of many different genetic disorders. Given the diversity of
etiologies and underlying biochemical pathways, personalized therapy for ASDs is 
logical, and clinical genetic testing is a prerequisite.

PMID: 25587659  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;20(2):170-5. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.179. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Increased female autosomal burden of rare copy number variants in human
populations and in autism families.

Desachy G(1), Croen LA(2), Torres AR(3), Kharrazi M(4), Delorenze GN(2), Windham 
GC(5), Yoshida CK(2), Weiss LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Institute for Human Genetics, UCSF, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern
California, Oakland, CA, USA. (3)Center for Persons with Disabilities, Utah State
University, Logan, UT, USA. (4)Genetic Disease Screening Program, California
Department of Public Health, Richmond, CA, USA. (5)Division of Environmental and 
Occupational Disease Control, California Department of Public Health, Richmond,
CA, USA.

Autosomal genetic variation is presumed equivalent in males and females and makes
a major contribution to disease risk. We set out to identify whether maternal
copy number variants (CNVs) contribute to autism spectrum disorders (ASDs).
Surprisingly, we observed a higher autosomal burden of large, rare CNVs in
females in the population, reflected in, but not unique to, ASD families.
Meta-analysis across control data sets confirms female excess in CNV number
(P=2.1 x 10(-5)) and gene content (P=4.1 x 10(-3)). We additionally observed CNV 
enrichment in ASD mothers compared with control mothers (P=0.03). We speculate
that tolerance for CNV burden contributes to decreased female fetal loss in the
population and that ASD-specific maternal CNV burden may contribute to high
sibling recurrence. These data emphasize the need for study of familial CNV risk 
factors in ASDs and the requirement of sex-matched comparisons.

PMID: 25582617  [PubMed - in process]


18. Nat Neurosci. 2015 Feb;18(2):182-4. doi: 10.1038/nn.3911. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Contribution of mGluR5 to pathophysiology in a mouse model of human chromosome
16p11.2 microdeletion.

Tian D(1), Stoppel LJ(2), Heynen AJ(2), Lindemann L(3), Jaeschke G(3), Mills
AA(4), Bear MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [2] The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [3]
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [4] Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Developmental Neuroscience Program, The Saban Research
Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA. (2)1] Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
[2] The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Pharmaceuticals Division, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland. (4)Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, USA.

Human chromosome 16p11.2 microdeletion is the most common gene copy number
variation in autism, but the synaptic pathophysiology caused by this mutation is 
largely unknown. Using a mouse with the same genetic deficiency, we found that
metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5)-dependent synaptic plasticity and
protein synthesis was altered in the hippocampus and that hippocampus-dependent
memory was impaired. Notably, chronic treatment with a negative allosteric
modulator of mGluR5 reversed the cognitive deficit.

PMCID: PMC4323380 [Available on 2015-08-01]
PMID: 25581360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

